---
page: 40
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

41 
 
3. Set Homework as a Team. 
Involving the patient in designing and scheduling homework increases the chances he/she 
will complete it. It is also important to get the patient’s agreement to complete the 
homework. Suggest homework assignments, and then ask the patient if you can help make 
adjustments to it. Ask, for example, the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Do you think this is reasonable?” 
“What would you change about the assignment?” 
“Let’s do an example together first. Then we can make changes if we need to.” 
4. Create a Win-Win Situation. 
Do not scold a patient for not completing homework assignments, but also do not dismiss 
their value. If a patient does not finish homework, which is common, you may learn about 
the patient’s level of motivation, ability to follow-through, or level of distress (e.g., too 
depressed to complete it). Failure to complete homework is an opportunity for you to 
evaluate the patient’s reason for noncompliance. The patient may have been anxious 
about completing an assignment incorrectly or may question the utility of the assignment. 
These thoughts are helpful to discuss in session.  
 
5. Start Homework In-Session. 
In the first few sessions after assigning homework, do a few examples with the patient in 
session, when possible. This gives the patient a clearer picture of what is expected and 
allows questions that he/she might have about the homework. It also gives the patient an 
idea how long the homework will take. In subsequent sessions, the patient may start the 
assignment with your assistance to troubleshoot questions about it. 
 
6. Ask About and Review Homework. 
To emphasize the importance of homework, always ask about and review homework the 
session after you assign it. If the patient did not complete homework, use session time, if 
possible, to complete the assignment, which may also help identify the aspects of the skill 
that need to be reviewed. If you do not review homework in session, patients may stop 
completing it.  
 
7. Anticipate and Prepare for Problems. 
With the first few homework assignments, help problem solve the assignment by eliciting 
feedback about it and planning when and how it will be completed. Assignments can be 
scheduled for a particular day and time to overcome barriers, and foreseeable problems 
for completing the assignment at that time can be discussed. For example, if the patient’s 
behavioral activation is to walk for 15 minutes on Wednesday at 4pm, discuss what to do if it 
rains or other factors prevent him/her from completing it. Agree upon and schedule a 
second option (e.g., using treadmill for 15 minutes). 
