---
page: 27
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

28 
Module 5: Orienting the Patient to Brief CBT 
 
Objectives  
• 
To learn how to convey information about the structure and content of CBT  
o 
To introduce the cognitive model 
o 
To introduce the collaborative nature of the therapeutic relationship 
 
What is orienting a patient to therapy, and why is this process important? 
 
Orienting the patient to therapy involves: 
 
 A discussion of the theory underlying Brief CBT 
 A description of how the presenting problems can be conceptualized and 
treated with this approach 
 Education about the structure, format, and expectations of therapy  
 
Orientation for Brief CBT also involves a discussion of the focused and time-limited nature of 
the therapy, plus the therapist’s rationale for selecting Brief CBT to treat a particular 
problem. As noted in Module 1, this rationale includes the strong research basis of Brief CBT 
and the fact that it is an empirically supported treatment. 
 
Many patients have little, if any, exposure to psychotherapy other than examples in the 
popular press. Providing patients with an understanding of the therapeutic process allows 
patients to be more active and aware of their role in the progression of therapy. Knowledge 
of the process of Brief CBT enhances the collaborative nature of therapy. 
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
Discussing the rationale for CBT and describing the process of therapy should occur in the 
first session. However, it is useful to revisit the model throughout treatment to expand upon 
the rationale for particular skills. The explanation of the model can be tailored to the 
patient's presenting problem, and the examples that are used to explain each component 
can be drawn from those generated in discussion of problems. (e.g., "I can't seem to get 
out of bed, and then I feel worthless"). For patients who think in concrete terms, it might be 
necessary to provide many examples and focus initially on behaviors rather than on 
cognitions.  
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Introducing the Cognitive Model 
 
The cognitive model is a theoretical paradigm for explaining how thoughts, feelings, and 
behaviors are associated. Most individuals believe that situations give rise to their emotions: 
 
Cognitive model based on the idea that situations give rise to emotions.
