---
page: 58
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

59 
 
 
 
THOUGHT RECORD 
 
 
 
(1) Situation 
(2) Automatic  
Thought(s) 
(3) Emotion(s) 
(4) Evidence to 
Support Thought  
(5) Evidence That 
Support Thought 
Doesn't 
(6) Alternative 
Thought 
(7) Rate 
Mood Now 
Out of breath 
when I played in 
the park with my 
granddaughter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
I’m too old to play 
with her. 
 
I can’t do what I 
used to do. 
 
I can’t be her 
caregiver. 
 
I have nothing to 
offer my family 
anymore. 
 
I am a burden to my 
family. 
 
I am no good to my 
family. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Defeated 
 
 
Sad 
 
 
Sad 
 
 
Disappointed  
Hopeless 
 
 
Hopeless  
Worthless 
 
Hopeless (80) 
Worthless (90) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
My family has to 
look in on me more 
often than they 
used to. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
I can still babysit my 
grandkids. 
 
I contribute to my family 
in new ways, such as 
offering advice and 
support. 
 
I still live independently. 
 
I am able to do many 
things physically, though 
do have more limitations 
than I used to. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
I 
Because of my 
COPD and 
because I am 
getting older, I 
have more 
physical 
limitations than 
I used to, and I 
do need my 
family’s help 
from time to 
time, but I am 
able to offer 
them many 
valuable 
things and 
contribute to 
my grandkids’ 
lives.(80) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Hopeless 
(10) 
 
Worthless 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(5) 
What actually 
happened? 
Where? What? 
How? When? 
What thought(s) went 
through your mind? 
How much did you 
believe it? (1-100) 
What 
emotion(s) did 
you feel at the 
time? Rate how 
intense were 
they?(1-100)  
What has 
happened to make 
you believe the 
thought is true? 
What has 
prove the 
true? 
happened to 
thought is not 
What is 
another way 
think of this 
situation? 
to 
0-100 
