---
page: 79
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Script #2 – The Beach: 
 
Imagine yourself walking down a sandy beach. The sand is white and warm between 
your toes. You are looking out over the calm, blue water. The waves are gently lapping 
at the shore. You feel the pleasant warmth of the sun on your skin… it’s a perfectly 
comfortable temperature outside. Breathe in deeply. There is a gentle breeze, and the 
sun is shining. Big, cotton-like clouds drift by as you hear sea gulls in the distance. You 
taste traces of salt on your lips. You are completely relaxed… there are no worries on this 
beach. There is nothing to distract you from feeling tranquil. Worries drift away. Notice 
the sounds, sights, smells, and how it feels to be in this very special place.  
Feel the sand under your feet… you decide to stretch out on the warm, fine, white 
sand… breathe deeply… feel the warm air. Your body is completely relaxed, and you 
have an overall feeling of warmth and comfort. You look up at the clouds pass by slowly 
across the beautiful blue sky. You are feeling rejuvenated and completely at peace. 
Remember that you can visit this place as often as you want and that it is wonderful. Say 
 
to yourself, “I am relaxed here… this place is special and makes me feel peaceful and 
content.” 
When you are done with your visit, open your eyes and stay in your comfortable 
position. Continue to breathe smoothly, in a relaxed and rhythmic fashion; take as long 
as you want to enjoy and relax. You feel at ease knowing your special place is always 
available to you, and you find that you feel relaxed even after you leave. 
Script #3 – The Meadows: 
 
Imagine yourself walking through a lovely meadow. The breeze feels pleasant against 
your skin. You are looking out over the calm, beautiful green grass. The blades of grass 
are gently swaying in the breeze. You feel the pleasant warmth of the sun on your skin… 
it’s a perfectly comfortable temperature outside. Breathe in deeply. There is a gentle 
breeze, and the sun is shining. Big, cotton-like clouds drift by as you hear birds in the 
distance. You hear the wind blow gently through the trees. You taste the sweet summer 
air on your lips. You are completely relaxed… there are no worries in this meadow. There 
is nothing to distract you from feeling tranquil. Worries drift away. Notice the sounds, the 
sights, the smells, and how it feels to be in this very special place.  
Feel the cool grass under your feet… you decide to stretch out on the soft, cushiony 
grass… breathe deeply… feel the warm air. Your body is completely relaxed, and you 
have an overall feeling of warmth and comfort. You look up as the clouds pass by slowly 
across the beautiful blue sky. You are feeling rejuvenated and completely at peace. 
Remember that you can visit this place as often as you want and that it is wonderful. Say 
to yourself, “I am relaxed here… this place is special and makes me feel peaceful and 
content.” 
When you are done with your visit, open your eyes and stay in your comfortable position. 
Continue to breathe smoothly, in a relaxed and rhythmic fashion; take as long as you 
want to enjoy and relax. You feel at ease knowing your special place is always available 
to you, and you find that you feel relaxed even after you leave. 
