---
page: 20
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 19 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Case Conceptualization Step 1:  Assessing Patient Concerns/Difficulties 
 
The patient's presenting concerns and current functioning can be assessed in a number of 
different ways. The following section outlines several possible avenues for identification of 
problems/concerns. 
 
A)  Using established self-report symptom inventories. A common practice in CBT involves 
the use of self-report symptom measures to assess baseline functioning as well as 
therapeutic progress. Frequently used measures for depression and anxiety include Beck 
Depression Inventory – Second Edition, Patient Health Questionnaire (depression), Geriatric 
Depression Scale, Beck Anxiety Inventory, and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. 
 
Self-report measures are often completed by patients while in the waiting room and 
evaluated by the clinician during the session. Often self-report measures can serve as a 
routine agenda item during CBT sessions and can highlight important improvements and/or 
continuing symptoms.  Information obtained from these self-report inventories can also 
provide insight into the way the patient thinks and behaves and factors that might be 
important areas of need. 
 
B)  Problem lists. These are a common and useful strategy for identifying the psychological, 
social, occupational, and financial difficulties faced by patients. Therapists who used 
problem lists typically elicit a list of five to 10 difficulties from the patient during the first part 
of session 1. Problems are best identified using open-ended questions (e.g., “What brings 
you to this clinic?” “What issues would you like to focus on in our work together?”). Problems 
are best described in terms of symptom frequency (How often does the symptom occur?), 
intensity (How mild or severe is it?) and functional impact (What influence does the 
symptom have on daily functioning or general distress?).  
 
Some patients may describe their difficulties or goals in vague or abstract ways, such as, “I 
want to improve my life, or I want to be happy again.” Problems and subsequent goals are 
best described in specific terms to maintain clinical focus. For example, specific problems 
are listed in the following table.  
 
 
Problem 
Frequency 
Severity 
Impact 
Socially 
Isolated  
Stay at home 
out of 7 days 
6 
Limited social contacts; 
moderate-to-severe isolation 
Highly distressing; socially 
debilitating; estranged 
family/friends 
Pain 
Experience  
pain each hour  
Pain intensity is 
when present 
high, 7 of 10, 
Pain leading to decreased 
activity level, inability to work 
Feelings of 
Worthlessness 
Occur 
days 
3 out of 7 
Very intense when present; 
sometimes involves suicidal 
thoughts 
Highly distressing; 
work, social, and 
relationships 
influences 
intimate 
Fatigue 
Occurs almost 
constantly 
Fatigue not intense 
troublesome  
but  
Decreased activity level, 
frequent naps, inability to 
complete daily tasks 
 
