---
page: 43
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

44 
Module 9: Identifying Maladaptive Thoughts and Beliefs 
 
Objectives:  
• 
To understand the role of maladaptive thoughts and beliefs in Brief CBT 
• 
To learn methods for educating the patient about maladaptive thoughts and beliefs 
 
What are maladaptive thoughts, and beliefs and why they are important in Brief CBT? 
 
The cognitive-behavioral model (as depicted below) suggests that three layers of cognitive 
dysfunction exist in individuals struggling with social and/or psychological problems: 
Automatic thoughts, intermediate beliefs, and core beliefs.  
 
An automatic thought is a brief stream of thought about ourselves and others.  Automatic 
thoughts largely apply to specific situations and/or events and occur quickly throughout the 
day as we appraise ourselves, our environment, and our future. We are often unaware of 
these thoughts, but are very familiar with the emotions that they create within us. 
Maladaptive automatic thoughts are distorted reflections of a situation, which are often 
accepted as true. Automatic thoughts are the real-time manifestations of dysfunctional 
beliefs about oneself, the world, and the future that are triggered by situations or 
exaggerated by psychiatric states, such as anxiety or depression.  
 
Intermediate beliefs are attitudes or rules that a person follows in his/her life that typically 
apply across situations (not situation specific as with automatic thoughts). Intermediate 
beliefs can often be stated as conditional rules: “It x , then y.” For example, “If I am thin, 
then I will be loved by others.” Individuals create these assumptions by categorizing the 
information they receive from the world around them. These rules guide thoughts and 
subsequently influence behaviors. 
 
Dysfunctional core beliefs drive dysfunctional rules and automatic thoughts. For example, 
the belief, I am unlovable, may be driving the conditional rule, If I am thin, then I will be 
loved by others, which may drive obsessive thinking about one’s appearance, excessive 
exercise, or disordered eating habits. Core beliefs are often formed in childhood and 
