---
page: 78
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other tips for imagery: 
1) Pair up imagery with deep-breathing exercises. 
2) Ask patient to close eyes during the exercise to increase vividness. 
3) Interject during the imagery experience aspects that you feel might 
benefit the patient. For example, a patient might use the beach image; 
and you might ask how the sun feels on the skin, whether he or she hears
anything, or what else he or she sees. 
4) Help the patient focus on aspects of the image that will guide him/her 
towards the goal. Help the patient to avoid too many unnecessary 
details that might distract from the goal. 
5) Point out that imagery is a portable skill that the patient can use in a 
variety of situations and completely without notice of others (PMR is less 
portable). 
6) Avoid imagery with psychotic patients, who might confuse reality with 
images. 
 
Imagery:  Example Scripts/Guides for Therapists  
Script #1: Generic Example 
 
Once your whole body feels relaxed, travel to your favorite place… it can be 
any time period or any place. This place is calm and safe… there are no worries 
here…  Look around this place. What do you see?  Do you hear the sounds 
around you? What are some of the sounds you hear in this place you are 
imagining?  How does this special place smell?  Walk around a little, and take in 
all the wonderful sights…  Feel the air around you and relax…. The air is fresh, 
and it’s easy to breathe here. Pay attention to how your body feels.…. Say to 
yourself, “I am totally relaxed… without worries… all the tension has drained 
away from my body.”  Take a moment to fully experience your favorite place…. 
Notice the sounds, the sights, smells, and how it feels to be in this very special 
place. Remember that you can visit this place as often as you want and that it is 
wonderful. Say to yourself, “I am relaxed here… this place is special and makes 
me feel at peace. 
 
When you are done with your visit to this special place, open your eyes and stay 
in your comfortable position. Continue to breathe smoothly, in a relaxed and 
rhythmic fashion. Take as long as you want to enjoy and relax. Feel at ease 
knowing your special place is always available to you, and find that you feel 
relaxed, even after you leave. 
