---
page: 17
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
necessary tool for all therapists. Clarification can be used to help simplify a message 
that is being sent by the patient or to help confirm the accuracy of what the 
therapist thinks he or she understood.  
 
 
Patient:   
I just do not feel like trying any more. 
Therapist:   
Tell me more about what you mean. 
Patient:  
I just feel like giving up. 
Therapist:   
Do you mean giving up on your goal to complete college; or are 
you referring to something different, like giving up on life and 
possibly harming yourself? 
Patient:   
I am not referring to suicide, if that is what you mean, but I am 
feeling really depressed. Each day seems like such a struggle, 
and I often just feel like staying in bed. When I said “give up,” I 
guess I was referring to not wanting to face all the struggles I 
face in life … my school work, financial problems, relationship 
problems, etc. 
Notice that the clarifying statement and question helped the therapist and patient 
to more fully explore her feelings and thoughts. Given this new information, the 
therapist is in a better position to explore in more detail the patient's concerns and to 
set up targeted efforts and strategies for treatment. 
Paraphrasing and Reflection:  These techniques involve restating the patient’s main 
thoughts in a different way or reflecting back the emotions the patient is currently 
experiencing to gain depth or clarification.   
Patient:   
Since my fiancé's death, I feel like every day is a struggle, and I often 
question whether my life will ever get better. I just miss him so much 
that I think about him constantly. I don't know what to do, but the 
pain is getting to be too much. 
Therapist:   
You are really struggling to feel better, and much of your pain comes 
from the grief and loss you feel from losing your fiancé. You may even
be questioning whether or not this pain will subside because it is 
getting unmanageable. 
Patient:   
Yes, that is correct. I do not want you to think that I think only about 
the pain of losing him. The pain I feel comes from my intense feelings 
of loss, but this pain is also because I miss all the things he meant to 
me, and the joy he brought to my life. I am really struggling because I 
do not want to let go of him, but holding on hurts so much. 
In this example of paraphrasing, the therapist gives back to the patient what he or 
she heard, which allows the patient to hear her own words and react with a more 
detailed response. The use of paraphrasing in this example facilitated a deeper 
understanding of the issue but also conveyed to the patient a feeling of being heard 
and understood. 
Listening for Themes and Summary Statements: Often, patients express thoughts, 
feelings, and behaviors that become thematic across situations. Although novice 
therapists may initially have difficulties identifying this thematic content, repetition 
