---
page: 16
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 15 
can cause a patient to feel inferior or intimidated. It is important to remember that 
the therapeutic relationship is one of partnership and that the therapist and patient 
work together to alleviate concerns, fears, and problems in the patient’s life.  
 
Congruence:  Making sure that your words, nonverbal behavior, and feelings match 
each other is referred to as congruence. Not demonstrating congruence of your 
feelings and thoughts can become confusing or misleading to a patient.  
 
Spontaneity:  This concept deals with the way the therapist speaks and the timeliness 
of responses. Responses and feedback provided "in the moment" are more valuable 
than feedback provided at a later time. Patients are more likely to receive 
spontaneous messages as genuine.  
 
Positive Regard  
Positive regard simply means showing all patients the respect they deserve. It’s essential to 
show the patient that he/she is valued and that what he/she has to say is important. 
Patients who feel that their thoughts and feelings are acknowledged and understood often 
share more and feel more connected to the therapist and the therapeutic process.  
 
Communicating positive regard may be harder than it seems, especially if you hold some 
negative beliefs about the person you are trying to help, which can be a common 
experience for therapists. Sharing any negative feelings or beliefs about your patients with 
your supervisor or consultant can be an excellent method to ensure that you develop and 
demonstrate genuine positive regard toward your patients. 
 
Commitment to the patient means that you are dedicated to working with the 
patient on whatever issues he or she is bringing to therapy. This includes being on 
time, avoiding cancelling the patient’s appointments, and using all efforts to help 
the patient work through those issues. 
 
Having a nonjudgmental attitude towards the thoughts, feelings, and actions of the 
patient is essential. It is possible to accept and understand a perspective without 
necessarily agreeing with it.  
 
Displaying warmth towards patients is a vital part of building rapport. Warmth can be 
displayed through tone of voice, facial expressions and body postures, or the 
thoughtfulness of your responses.  
 
The following section addresses the concept of active listening. Active listening is a useful 
technique to communicate the nonspecific factors of empathy, genuineness, and positive 
regard.  
 
Active Listening  
Listening to your patients is the foundation of all therapeutic approaches. Listening is made 
up of three steps: receiving a message, processing it, and sending it back. Therapists should 
attempt to remain open to all messages from their patients (both verbal and nonverbal), 
and attempt to process as many messages as possible.  
 
Clarification: Since we all speak from our own frame of reference, messages we send 
to others may not be received in the way we intended. Clarification is a useful and 
