---
page: 62
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

63 
For patients who have difficulty identifying activities, you can introduce a behavioral 
activity checklist (see Appendix).  
 
Before completing the next steps (e.g., setting a plan), it is important to discuss the potential 
importance of the behavior with the patient. If he/she reports low importance, encourage 
the patient to find another, more meaningful activity. 
 
Step #3: Setting an Action Plan. 
Once the patient has identified a meaningful activity to focus on, help shape this work into 
a meaningful therapeutic goal. Action plans are one mechanism of creating meaningful 
behavioral goals for therapy. Action plans in their most basic form stipulate the specific goal 
to be obtained, defined in terms of observable and measurable characteristics and a 
timeframe for monitoring progress.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example: 
 
Goal:  To read at least three times per week (a minimum of 30 minutes per 
reading session). 
 
Timeframe:  Patient will complete three reading sessions over the next week. 
An expanded action plan might also include: 
 
a) Additional details of the plan – e.g., how the goal will be obtained 
 
b) Possible barriers to reaching the goal and ways to address barriers if they arise 
c) Possible facilitators of obtaining the goal, e.g., important people or situations that 
might aid the patient 
d) Patient's confidence in reaching the goal in the timeline established; if 
confidence is low, you might wish to alter the plan to increase chances of success. 
 
e) Skills that the patient might want to enlist to help reach the goal (e.g., relaxation 
skills, problem-solving skills, etc.) 
 
Step #4:  Monitor progress in mood, mastery, and confidence 
It is important to monitor the patient's mood and feelings of mastery and confidence. 
Outcomes such as improvement in mood, mastery, or confidence can be best identified 
through patient homework assignments that ask the patient to document the frequency 
and use of the behavioral activity and any corresponding emotions or feelings of mastery or 
confidence.   
 
On the basis of this monitoring of outcomes, evaluate the action plan and the patient's 
ability to work towards achieving goals. If problems arise, make changes accordingly (e.g., 
breaking down goals into smaller steps, determining patient perceptions of importance and 
changing goals accordingly). Monitoring shows the patient that you continue to believe in 
the importance of the technique/exercise and also serves to further motivate many patients 
by increasing the effectiveness of the intervention. 
 
Tips for Managing Barriers to Doing Activities 
1) Help the patient break down more difficult activities into smaller steps. Look for 
alternative behaviors to accomplish a goal prohibited by a chronic illness or other physical 
limitations. For example, a structural/mechanical engineer who was forced to retire 
because of a physical limitation may feel that his/her life is no longer productive. Although 
the patient is physically unable to fulfill prior job duties, you can work with him/her to identify 
