---
page: 110
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

116 
Sample Brief CBT Outline #2 
 
Patient Description 
James is a 24-year-old college student on a full academic scholarship. He called the 
therapist to discuss his feelings of anxiety and whether there is anything that can help him 
“calm his nerves.” James said that he is used to getting anxious in certain situations, but that 
it is starting to affect all areas of his life. He says that he doesn’t have a girlfriend because 
he gets “too freaked out” to ask anyone on a date. He also says that his anxiety is starting to 
affect his grades because he gets so nervous during exams that he breaks into a cold 
sweat and cannot concentrate. He wants to be able to control his anxiety but feels there is 
no hope. 
 
Case Conceptualization: James is experiencing cognitive and physiological anxiety in 
response to evaluative situations. Therapy will focus on stress-management skills for his 
physiological symptoms and identifying dysfunctional thoughts or worries about his 
performance in academic and social situations. Specifically, therapy will identify 
catastrophic thoughts he has about failure. 
 
Goals 
Relaxation  
Identifying Maladaptive Thoughts/Beliefs 
Challenging Maladaptive Thoughts/Beliefs 
 
Session 1 
Establish relationship. 
Identify James’ presenting problem. 
Introduce cognitive behavioral therapy. 
Introduce the cognitive-behavioral model. 
Describe problem in context of mode. 
Set goals. 
Receive feedback from James. 
 
Session 2 
Check mood. 
Introduce and practice progressive muscle relaxation. 
Set homework: Plan two times during week to practice progressive muscle relaxation. 
Receive feedback from James. 
 
Session 3 
Check mood. 
Review progressive muscle relaxation. 
Introduce and practice imagery. 
Homework:  
1 progressive muscle relaxation 
 
 
1 imagery exercise 
Receive feedback from James. 
 
 
 
 
 
