---
page: 81
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

82 
Module 14: Ending Treatment and Maintaining Changes 
 
Objectives 
• 
To understand the process for preparing the patient for ending treatment 
• 
To learn techniques for preventing relapse 
 
What is ending treatment, and why is it important to plan for it? 
 
End-of-treatment planning is the collaborative process of preparing the patient and 
assessing his/her readiness for ending treatment and moving beyond reliance on the 
therapist to apply skills. Planning allows the patient to prepare for the end of treatment, to 
review skills learned in treatment, and to vocalize and problem-solve concerns about 
functioning outside treatment. All these factors reduce anxiety and allay fears a patient 
might have about ending a therapeutic relationship.  
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
End-of-treatment planning begins at the first session when you give the patient some 
indication of the frequency and duration of treatment. End-of-treatment planning is an 
ongoing process, culminating in the final sessions with a review of treatment and 
introduction of relapse-prevention skills. 
 
Patients with personality disorders or disorders of attachment may be particularly sensitive to 
feeling abandoned or upset as a result of ending the therapeutic relationship. For these 
patients, it is important to discuss treatment termination in an empowering and thoughtful 
way—recognizing and normalizing their fears, assuring them safeguards are in place (e.g., 
emergency resources, booster sessions), and encouraging them via reminders that the 
purpose of CBT is self-management of symptoms. 
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Reviewing What Was Learned 
The last session of Brief CBT should be spent reviewing and recording the different cognitive 
and behavioral skills the patient has learned. Use Socratic questioning to elicit this list (“What 
have you learned as a result of our time together? Is there anything that was particularly 
meaningful to you about your time in therapy?”), as patients may generate skills or benefits 
of therapy not known to you. Patients should have a list of these skills they can take with 
them. They should also be encouraged to keep the other handouts (e.g., thought records) 
completed during treatment as a reminder of their skills. 
 
Relapse Prevention 
Many patients are concerned that they will not be able to manage future psychological 
problems or psychosocial stressors without the aid of therapy. In planning for the end of 
treatment, you and the patient anticipate potential stressors and symptoms and plan: 1) 
What tools the patient has learned in therapy that he or she could use for particular 
stressors/symptoms, and 2) when he/she might need to contact a mental health 
professional for additional assistance (e.g., suicidal ideation). Preparing for inevitable 
difficulties is empowering and encouraging for patients. A functional assessment may be 
used to identify future problematic situations (see Module 4). 
 
