---
page: 37
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

38 
Troubleshooting Agenda Setting 
 
In discussing agenda items, there are many pitfalls for a new CBT therapist. It is your 
responsibility to keep the discussion on track and focused. To prevent unfocused 
discussions, gently guide the patient back to the topic when he or she drifts, emphasize key 
emotions, beliefs, and automatic thoughts, and often summarize and rephrase what the 
patient says. You can also discuss at the start of therapy that one of your roles is to keep 
sessions on track; so you may, at times, need to shift the focus of conversation. Getting the 
patient’s agreement on this point at the beginning helps him/her feel more comfortable if 
you need to redirect or interrupt later in therapy. Pacing is also a concern for therapists, but 
prioritizing and collaboratively agreeing on agenda items and times can help you and the 
patient stay within the allotted time.  
 
Patients and therapists sometimes have difficulty setting the agenda together. Sometimes 
patients do not want to contribute to the agenda because of feeling hopeless or negative 
toward therapy. Occasionally, the patient may also be unfocused when setting the 
agenda (e.g., recount events of past week). It is often necessary to educate the patient 
about therapy by clarifying what kinds of issues constitute agenda issues and how session 
time may be optimally spent. 
 
CBT suggests that change involves skill acquisition and not simply identifying distorted 
thinking. Therefore, recognizing a distorted thought can be enlightening, but you should 
also use session time to teach skills to address the problem (e.g., thought records, 
behavioral activation) and not simply discuss the issue with the patient or offer advice. The 
process of skill acquisition is what sets CBT apart from “talk therapies” (supportive therapy). 
 
Example Homework Assignments 
1. Create an agenda for next session, using the given outline. 
2. Think about adjustments you would like to make to our current agenda and reasons 
why. 
3.  Crate a list of concerns/discomfort in the agenda-setting process. 
 
Supplemental Readings 
Beck, J.S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond.  New York: Guilford Press; 
Chapters 4 & 5. 
