---
page: 67
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

68 
L (Listing the Potential Pros and Cons of Each Potential Solution)   
Often, writing options, along with listing pros and cons, can be helpful in considering 
potential options. Writing allows additional thought, as well as a visual image of options. 
Recommend that patients consider solutions in a logical manner, thus reducing the time 
spent ruminating. It may also help to identify additional thoughts that might benefit from 
changes using the techniques, such as changing thoughts. In some cases, identification of 
pros/cons may require obtaining information from other people, such as lawyers or financial 
advisors.  
 
V (Verifying the Best Solution) 
Examine the pros and cons of the solutions listed. Patients may wish to “rank order” the 
solutions based on which solutions are most practical and/or desirable. 
 
E (Enacting the Plan)  
Identify the steps needed to carry out the solution selected. Patients may need to break 
actions down into steps small enough to facilitate achievement of goals. Once you and the 
patient finish formulating a specific plan, encourage the patient to carry it out. 
 
D (Deciding if the Plan Worked) 
Follow-up with the patient to see how well the chosen solution actually worked. If the 
solution was effective, give positive reinforcement. If the solution was not effective, return to 
the first step in the SOLVED technique to specify a new problem or move to “O” or “L” to 
identify other goals or potential solutions for the same problem. The decision to move back 
and to which step is largely up to you, who might now have additional information about 
pros and cons and possible solutions. 
 
Problem-Solving Examples 
 
To facilitate patient learning, you might wish to provide examples of the SOLVED program at 
work. The following section provides several examples of the SOLVED technique.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Examples of Specifying the Problem in SOLVED: Common Problems in Chronic Illness 
Emotional/Social/Relationship Problems 
Managing Mood  
Difficulty Asking for Help  
Difficulty Communicating 
Marital Stress 
Family Stress 
**To effectively use the SOLVED technique, problems may need to be more specific than those 
listed above. 
Physical/Symptom Problems 
Overcoming or Working With Physical Limitations 
Medication Adherence Issues 
Transportation and Mobility Issues 
Minimizing Influence of Symptoms  
Minimizing Influence of Medication Side-Effects 
