---
page: 18
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 17 
over time (e.g., across sessions) usually helps to create a clearer picture of the salient 
therapeutic issues that require attention or focus. With experience, therapists 
become more effective and efficient at identifying thematic content.  
 
Once identified, thematic content can be a very powerful mechanism to influence 
treatment outcomes. Summarization is the technique that brings thematic content 
into the purview of the patient. Summarization is a condensed phrasing of the 
patient’s responses over a specific period of time (e.g., across the session, since the 
outset of treatment, since the onset of his/her current difficulties). You should 
rephrase the themes, and repeat them back to the patient for clarification.  
 
Barriers and Challenges to Building an Effective Therapeutic Relationship 
Setting limits in an empathetic manner is an essential tool for new therapists. Many new 
therapists desire to “make it all better,” in that they may coddle and console the patient 
and are distracted from working on deeper issues. A therapist can create a holding 
environment through empathetic words and active listening. A holding environment is a 
setting in which the patient feels like he or she is being heard and that he or she is in a safe 
and secure place to voice thoughts and feelings without judgment.  
 
Moving from rapport and relationship building to assessment and goal setting can be 
challenging. When therapist and patient are “on the same page,” this transition appears 
seamless. Often, however, patients and therapists are not speaking the same language. For 
example, a therapist may feel most comfortable when tackling a certain issue first; whereas 
a patient may wish to focus on a different problem first. When the therapist and patient are 
not in congruence regarding goals, the move between rapport building and goal setting is 
strained. To overcome this issue, therapists are encouraged to use motivational interviewing 
strategies (see Rollnick, Mason, Butler – Chapters 3, 4, and 5). Primary techniques involve 
listening to the patient, following the patient's lead and/or motivation, and setting 
collaborative and mutually agreed-upon goals. A vital aspect to transitioning from rapport 
to goal setting involves assessing the importance, confidence, and readiness of the patient 
about specific treatment goals (see Goal Setting, Module 6). 
 
Supplemental Readings 
Beck, J. S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. Chapter 3. New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Cormier, W.H. & Cormier, L.S. (1991). Interviewing strategies for helpers: Fundamental 
skills and cognitive behavioral interventions, 3rd edition. Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5. Pacific Grove, 
CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing Company. 
Rollnick S.,  Mason, P., & Butler, C. (1999). Health behavior change. A guide for 
practitioners. Chapters 3, 4, 5. New York: Churchill Livingstone. 
