---
page: 59
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

60 
Module 11: Behavioral Activation 
 
Objectives 
• 
To understand the important clinical components and applications of behavioral 
activation strategies in brief CBT.  
• 
To learn skills and techniques to effectively use behavioral strategies for positive patient 
change (especially related to increasing pleasant events) 
 
What is behavioral activation, and why is it important?  
 
Behavioral activation includes a set of procedures and techniques aimed at increasing 
patient activity and access to reinforcing situations that improve mood and functioning. 
Behavioral activation amounts to the "B" in CBT interventions. From this behavioral 
standpoint, depression, for example, contains a host of characteristics that function to 
maintain depressive affect (e.g., passivity, fatigue, feelings of hopelessness) and decrease 
chances of adaptive coping by increasing avoidance. The key here is that difficulty with 
mood often serves to increase avoidance of adaptive coping, including pleasant events, 
which help to alleviate and avoid depression. Re-introducing pleasant events (one form of 
behavioral activation) can serve to improve mood in many different ways - 1) reversing 
avoidance, 2) increasing physical activity, 3) increasing self-confidence and 4) increasing 
feelings of usefulness and purpose. Recent empirical evidence suggests that behavioral 
interventions improve mood symptoms but also reduce maladaptive thought patterns 
(Jacobson et al., 1996).  
 
An important point for therapists:  Behavioral activation (alternatively referred to as 
increasing pleasant activities) consists of a host of possible behaviors including, but not 
limited to, 
1)  Re-introducing prior pleasant activities 
2)  Introducing new pleasant activities 
3)  Active coping (e.g., taking some form of behavioral action) to alleviate or reduce 
a life stressor; examples of active/behavioral coping that are not pleasant-event 
driven include 
□ 
Filing or getting taxes done 
□ 
Cleaning out a messy closet 
□ 
Calling an estranged family member 
The goal of active coping is to decrease stress through accomplishment or 
overcoming avoidance. 
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
Because of its relatively simple and straightforward approach, behavioral activation is a 
good technique for initial stages of treatment and can be highly effective for patients with 
limited insight into their difficulties. Activation is also easily measured (e.g., number, 
frequency, or duration of activities) and therefore can be used to document and convey 
progress to patients (e.g., to increase treatment investment and improve patient self-
confidence and control over symptoms).  
 
Behavioral interventions are particularly powerful for depressed mood. Activation for 
depression generally serves to get the patient moving. Almost all behaviors that include 
physical activity, planning, or accomplishing tasks are appropriate here.  
