---
page: 74
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

75 
critical, and you should ensure that patients fully understand how this applies to their current 
difficulties.  
 
Step #3:  Identify States of Tension. 
Explain to the patient that tension often builds gradually without conscious awareness. 
Learning to detect the initial signs of an increase is an important step towards avoiding a 
full- blown occurrence of tension. Inform the patient that, no matter the level of intensity, he 
or she can stop and reverse the tension using knowledge of PMR – in essence, it is never too 
late to reduce tension. Over time patients become increasingly skilled at identifying stress 
earlier and earlier (e.g., their awareness increases).   
 
Step #4:  Tense Muscle Groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A brief word of caution: If at any point during the technique a patient experiences 
pain, alter or completely discontinue the technique. If the patient experiences 
chronic pain in any part of the body, it is best to avoid the tensing component for  
muscles in that area; just do the relaxing component when the patient gets to those 
muscle groups. 
PMR asks the patient to tense and release different muscle groups in sequence, moving 
from the arms to the face, neck, chest and shoulders, torso, and legs. For each specific 
muscle group, it’s important to try to tense only that muscle group during the tensing part of 
the exercise. Throughout the procedure, it is important to concentrate on the sensations 
produced by the different exercises. Asking the patient to describe bodily sensations is very 
important for the learning process. Statements or phrases from you might include:  “What 
are you noticing about your body right now?” These questions help the patient to focus on 
the way the body “feels” when tense and relaxed. 
 
Tensing Instructions 
 Model each tension procedure. Ask the patient to practice, and provide feedback. Check 
to be sure that the patient can identify tension in each group before moving on to the next.  
 
a. Dominant arm. Make a fist and tense biceps; pull wrist upward, while pushing 
elbow down against the arm of chair or bed. 
b. Nondominant arm. Same as above. 
c. Forehead, lower cheeks and jaw. Lift eyebrows as high as possible, bite teeth 
together, and pull corners of mouth tightly. 
d. Neck and throat. Pull chin down toward chest; at the same time, try to prevent 
it from actually touching the chest. Counterpose muscles in front part of neck 
against those in the back part of neck. 
e. Shoulders, chest, and upper back/abdomen. Take a deep breath and hold it. 
At the same time, pull the shoulder blades back and together, trying to make 
them touch. Try to keep your arms as relaxed as possible while tensing this 
muscle group. At the same time make the stomach hard by pressing it out, as if 
someone were going to hit you in the stomach. 
f. 
Dominant leg. Lift foot off the floor and push down on the chair with thigh. 
g. Nondominant leg. Same as above. 
 
