---
page: 60
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

61 
The use of behavioral activation for anxiety conditions requires a little more detail. Patients 
with anxiety symptoms often avoid situations out of fear of negative consequence 
occurring in response to engaging in a particular activity. Although behavioral activation 
can aid these patients, you must also understand that the activity itself is not reinforcing 
(pleasant) but rather feared. It is only the resulting completion of the task that may 
generate positive affect (e.g., I faced my fear, and nothing terrible happened). This 
response differs from depression in that depressed patients will often look at behavioral 
activation as a positive outcome in and of itself (e.g., "exercising is enjoyable" or "I love 
talking with my grand-daughter"). To effectively apply behavioral activation with anxious 
patients, it is important to monitor anxiety and combine behavioral activation with relaxation 
techniques to increase patient comfort and control. Similarly, be careful not to allow 
behavioral activation procedures to further aid in the patient’s avoidance of fearful 
situations (e.g., presenting problem is avoiding interpersonal difficulties with spouse, and 
patient chooses to shop or be on the internet for pleasure but specifically when spouse is in 
the house to avoid confrontation/talking about issues).  
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Step #1:  Provide patient with rationale for behavioral activation. 
It is important to educate the patient as to what behavioral activation is and how it can be 
useful for improving depression and anxiety. Let him/her know that when feeling a little 
down or having a bad day and not feeling well physically can make it more likely that he or 
she will stop doing many activities that used to be pleasurable. When this happens, the 
patient can get into the habit of avoiding pleasant activities that might actually help 
him/her feel better. It is also important for the patient to understand the connection 
between what he or she does and how he/she feels, both mentally and physically. You are 
encouraged to explain to the patient that increasing activity and/or taking action, even 
when we do not feel like it, help one to feel better physically, as well as decrease 
depression. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therapist:  
I would like to talk a little about what your day looked like yesterday. Walk me 
through your day (e.g., what did you do in the morning, afternoon, evening) 
Patient: 
Well, in the morning I woke up at 10 am and ate breakfast. I watched TV until 
noon. Then I ate lunch. Around 2:30 I took a shower. At 3:00 I went for a walk with 
my dog. 
Therapist: 
Okay, thanks. How did you feel in the morning? 
Patient: 
Tired. I just couldn't get motivated and did not want to do anything. I guess I was 
feeling sorry for myself – depressed, I guess. 
Therapist:  
You say you were feeling depressed. If you had to rate that feeling on a scale of 0 
to 100 (100 is worst depression) what would you say your depression was? 
Patient: 
65. 
Therapist:  
What about in the afternoon after your shower and walk?  How would you rate your 
depression? 
Patient: 
20. 
Therapist: 
To what do you attribute this change in your depression? 
Patient: 
I guess I just got off my couch and started moving which helped me feel better. 
Therapist: 
That would be my guess as well. (subsequently, explain the connections between 
mood and behavior and encourage use of behavioral activation). 
