---
page: 41
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

42 
Using Bibliotherapy as Homework 
 
Bibliotherapy, or assigning the patient reading materials relevant to Brief CBT or his/her 
presenting problems, is a useful tool for Brief CBT because it allows the patient to  read 
about his/her disorder or CBT between sessions. Bibliotherapy emphasizes the self-
management focus of CBT and can accelerate therapeutic progress and maintenance of 
changes. Reading materials may be websites, book chapters, or sections of CBT patient 
manuals. Some common examples of CBT bibliotherapy are Mind Over Mood (Greenberger 
& Padesky, 1995) and Feeling Good Handbook (Burns, 1999). 
 
Homework Troubleshooting 
 
Practical Problems  
Occasionally, therapists may encounter a patient who waits until the day before a session 
to do the homework. This is problematic because certain assignments, such as monitoring 
automatic thoughts, are most effective and most accurate when completed in the 
moment. There are many reasons patients may put off doing homework, and your role is to 
explore these reasons in a proactive, nonjudgmental, nonpunitive way. 
 
Sometimes a patient may simply forget to do homework. He/she may have a busy schedule 
or have trouble remembering to complete homework. Using a calendar and scheduling 
time to do homework are useful in this situation and provides the opportunity for time- 
management skill building. 
 
A few assignments described in this text might be difficult for some patients. If a patient is 
having trouble completing an assignment because of the level of difficulty, it is your job to 
explain how to complete it and gauge the patient’s understanding. Some assignments may 
need to be broken down into smaller steps until the patient can fully grasp how it is to be 
completed. 
 
Psychological Problems 
Patients who don’t complete homework might have maladaptive thoughts about 
themselves, the homework assignment, or therapy that need to be addressed. In these 
cases encouragement, thought testing and listing the advantages and disadvantages of 
doing homework may be useful. Though outside the scope of this manual, techniques, such 
as motivational interviewing (Rollnick, et al 1999), may also be used to address the 
ambivalence a patient may feel about homework.  Patient perceptions of importance and 
confidence are very important for non-compliance issues. 
 
Many patients have negative reactions to the word homework. They may feel 
overwhelmed by the perceived time or energy it will take to complete, or concerned that 
therapy is like schoolwork. In giving homework, address any concerns the patient may have 
about time constraints, and explain how long each assignment should take, while working 
with the patient to generate reasonable tasks. If the patient dislikes the term homework, 
work with him/her collaboratively to select another label, such as practice, between-session 
progress, task, or experiment. 
 
Homework may be problematic for patients who are perfectionists or desire to please the 
therapist because they may spend too much time on an assignment or be overly 
concerned about getting the “right answer.” Clarify that the exercise is not about getting 
