---
page: 31
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

32 
Module 6: Goal Setting 
 
Objectives 
 
To understand the concept of goal setting in Brief CBT 
 
To acquire skills to set feasible and appropriate goals in Brief CBT 
 
What is goal setting, and why is it important to set goals in therapy?  
 
Goal setting is the process of collaboratively identifying specific therapeutic outcomes for 
treatment. Goals must be observable, measurable and achievable and relate to cognitive 
or behavioral changes relevant to the patient’s presenting problem. Goals are tied to 
specific skills to be addressed in treatment. Goals increase the continuity of sessions, allow 
for directed, focused treatment, and enable the patient and therapist to assess the 
progress of therapy and identify change in an objective manner. 
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
In addition to identifying the problem and building rapport, goal setting is one of the first 
therapeutic activities to be completed in Brief CBT. Although goals can be 
changed/modified at any point during therapy, to maximize applicability and benefit to 
the patient, a preliminary set of goals should be established and agreed upon by the end 
of the first or second session.  
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts)  
 
Goal setting begins with the identification of broad goals. These are global and refer to 
areas of functioning (e.g., family, work, social relationships, financial concerns, health, etc). 
Broad goals are closely tied to the therapist’s case conceptualization and the patient’s 
presenting problem.  
 
Once broad goals are identified collaboratively, the patient and therapist prioritize goals. 
This process involves determining the most central issues that cause concern and arranging 
them from most important to least important. Starting with the problem that has the best 
chance of being solved can help increase the patient’s commitment to therapy. If one skill 
is prerequisite to a subsequent goal, that goal can also be prioritized in treatment (e.g., 
relaxation before exposure, awareness of thoughts before thought challenging). 
 
Use a graded approach to goals, in which you take small steps in service of the larger goal 
each week through session content or homework assignments. Identifying and sequencing 
action steps involves breaking each goal into smaller steps to help the patient know what to 
do at every stage of accomplishing the goal without feeling overwhelmed by a huge task.  
 
Once goals have been identified and prioritized, they are operationalized, which involves 
defining the goal and all the steps that it will take to achieve it in concrete, 
observable/measurable cognitive or behavioral terms. 
