---
page: 12
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 11 
When? (Indications/Contraindications)  
 
Ideally, supervision or consultation occurs on a regular basis. Typically, for therapists learning 
CBT, supervision/consultation should occur every week or every other week. Monthly 
consultation meetings may be appropriate for licensed practitioners in a more advanced 
stage of psychotherapy training. 
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts)  
 
The following table outlines the most common formats for supervision. The usefulness of 
each procedure will be determined by the goals of supervision and the supervisee’s level of 
training and developmental needs. Exposure to multiple training modalities is seen as most 
effective. 
 
Format 
Description 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
 
Verbal Report 
Therapists verbally report 
to the supervisor the 
details of a given therapy 
session or case. 
- Less threatening to 
therapists 
- Allows for free- 
flowing discussion 
between therapist 
and supervisor 
 
- Subject to therapist 
recollection (errors 
and omissions) 
- Limited ability for 
supervisors to 
monitor and provide 
feedback on the 
"process" of therapy 
Process Notes 
Therapists write down and 
recount issues identified in 
- Less threatening to 
clinicians 
- Subject to therapist 
focus and 
session along with their 
own personal reactions 
and feelings encountered 
in the session. 
- Provides a more 
detailed recount of 
the session 
(compared with 
verbal report alone) 
- Begins to identify 
therapist issues during 
session (process) 
recollection 
- Limited ability to 
monitor and provide 
feedback on the 
process of therapy 
Audio/Video 
Taping 
Actual sessions are audio 
or video taped and 
reviewed in supervision. 
- Provides access to 
objective and process 
content of sessions 
- Serves as an 
- Can be 
threatening to 
therapists (and 
sometimes to 
excellent learning tool 
patients) 
- Logistical issues – 
specific informed 
consent for patients, 
availability of 
equipment 
Group 
Supervision 
Multiple therapists interact 
with supervisor in group 
format. 
- Provides therapist-to-
therapist learning 
- Uses all the above 
- Less individual 
emphasis, not as 
much time for each 
techniques in addition 
to group format 
therapist 
 
 
