---
page: 65
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

66 
Module 12: Problem Solving 
 
Objectives 
 
To introduce problem solving and its potential use in psychotherapy 
 
To learn how to apply problem-solving skills during Brief CBT 
 
What is problem solving, and why is it important in therapy?  
 
Problem-solving techniques generally involve a process by which an individual attempts to 
identify effective means of coping with problems of everyday living. This often involves a set 
of steps for analyzing a problem, identifying options for coping, evaluating the options, 
deciding upon a plan, and developing strategies for implementing the plan.  
 
Problem-solving strategies can be used with a wide range of problems, including 
depression, anxiety, anger and aggression, stress management, coping with medical illness, 
addiction, and relationship/family difficulties. Problem-solving techniques teach skills that 
aid the patient in feeling increased control over life issues that previously felt overwhelming 
or unmanageable. In this manner, problem solving can help with practical problem 
resolution as well as emotion-focused coping (e.g., increasing control, decreasing stress, 
and increasing hopefulness). 
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
Thoughts and beliefs are challenged when a thought or belief is not true or a situation is 
unchangeable. Alternatively, problem solving may be used when the root of an issue is a 
changeable situation; and the thoughts associated with the noxious situation might be 
accurate. Problem solving can be especially effective when a specific problem is able to 
be addressed and operationalized. A specific operationalized problem is one that is easily 
explained, identified, and/or measured. Problem solving works best when a practical 
solution is available. For example, a patient complaining of social isolation likely has 
potential solutions to this difficulty (e.g., calling a friend, joining a group, engaging in a 
socially driven hobby).  
 
Examples of problems appropriate for problem solving include: 
1) How to communicate with a partner about a difficult issue  
2) How best to cope with the functional limitations of a medical condition  
3) How to reduce financial distress   
 
Note that you are not responsible for finding answers to these questions but rather should 
aid the patient in finding his or her own answers. In this manner you are a facilitator who 
possesses problem-solving skills.  
 
Problem solving may be difficult for the following individuals: 
 
1) Persons with serious mental illness (psychotic disorders, bipolar disorder) 
2) Persons with severe depression, who might require more focused cognitive work or  
    medications 
3) Persons who have difficulty thinking about long-term effects (e.g., persons with  
   cognitive impairment) 
4) Persons with problems that are largely emotional; for example, a person who feels  
    incompetent at work and often feels that others are overly critical may be  
