---
page: 42
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

43 
the “right answer,” and that they should concentrate on recording real feelings and 
thoughts and not concern themselves with spelling, grammar, or appearance of the 
assignment. 
 
Therapist Cognition Problems 
Although completion of homework is primarily the patient’s responsibility, sometimes your 
thoughts about an assignment or approach to homework plays a role in noncompliance. 
Check your own thoughts about assigning homework, and determine whether there is 
anything you can adjust in your approach that could better encourage the patient. Ask 
yourself, “Is the assignment too difficult?”, “Did I explain the assignment thoroughly?”, or 
“Have I led the patient to believe that homework is unimportant to therapy?” 
 
Sample Homework Assignments 
Examples of homework that could be assigned for each cognitive and behavioral skill are 
included in each module. Examples of tailoring a homework assignment to a specific case 
are included in Appendix B. 
 
Supplemental Readings 
 
Beck, J.S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford Press; 
Chapter 14. 
 
Burns, D.D. (1999). Feeling good handbook. New York: Plume Books (Penguin USA). 
Cormier, W.H. & Cormier, L.S. (1991). Interviewing strategies for helpers: Fundamental 
skills and cognitive behavioral interventions, 3rd ed. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole 
Publishing Company; Chapters 12, 16, & 19. 
Greenberg, D. & Padesky, C.A. (1995). Mind over mood: Change the way you feel 
by changing the way you think. New York: Guilford Press; Chapters 3, 6, 7, 8. 
 
Rollnick S.,  Mason, P., & Butler, C. (1999). Health behavior change. A guide for 
practitioners. Chapters 3, 4, 5. New York: Churchill Livingstone. 
