---
page: 47
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example continued: 
Therapist:  
“Let’s take a look at that line of thinking and the feelings it creates. It seems 
that when that thought entered your mind, your mood changed very quickly. 
Did you notice that?” 
Patient:  
“Yeah, I guess it did upset me pretty fast.” 
You usually will also need to use specific questions to elicit an automatic hot thought. These 
questions are found on p. 48-49 and in Module 10. 
 
Automatic Thoughts Between Sessions 
 In Brief CBT, a principal characteristic is the work the patient does outside of session. 
Because identifying automatic thoughts is a novel concept to many, practicing outside of 
session will facilitate movement and change in therapy. In fact, Burns and Nolen-Hoeksema 
(1992) found that patients who completed homework had significantly better treatment 
outcomes than those who did not. Practicing key skills between sessions allows session time 
to be used for new skill acquisition and troubleshooting. Initially, when a specific situation is 
brought up in session, always ask, “What was going through your mind at that moment?” 
This helps the patient build awareness of his/her automatic thought, both within and outside 
of session.  
 
Because automatic thoughts may occur outside awareness, asking for a more detailed 
description of the situation is also helpful in pinpointing maladaptive thoughts. For example, 
you could "take the patient back" to when it happened, using imagery (e.g., Where were 
you when this happened? What time of day was it?). If the patient reverts to past tense, 
remind him/her to tell the story in present tense to help bring back the thoughts and feelings 
that occurred in this situation. 
 
With continued questioning, it is possible that there may be more than one automatic 
thought associated with a problematic situation. Elicit and record all automatic thoughts 
given for a particular situation. 
Therapist: 
“Craig, what else were you thinking during this phone call 
with your wife?” 
Craig:  
“I was thinking that she knows how bad I feel for not coming 
to the party and she wants me to feel even worse.” 
Therapist:  
“So you weren’t thinking only that they were using you. You 
were also thinking that they knew you felt bad, and they 
wanted you to feel worse?” 
Craig:   
“Yes.” 
Therapist:  
“So, that is really three different thoughts that you were 
having that were creating feelings of anger?” 
Craig:   
“I guess so.” 
Remember that a patient’s automatic thoughts should be the actual words or images that 
go through his or her mind. Patients (or therapists) may often interpret or rephrase thoughts; 
however, the goal is to get unprocessed thoughts verbatim. 
