---
page: 49
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

50 
Core Beliefs 
Throughout therapy, hypothesize core beliefs that may be underlying dysfunctional 
behaviors and thoughts. These hypotheses aid development of the case conceptualization 
and treatment plan (see Module 5). A belief that is likely to be core will appear in several 
different areas of the patient’s life (i.e., relationships, work, parenting). 
 
If time permits in Brief CBT, after you have collected enough evidence to support the 
alleged core belief, present and discuss it with the patient.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
“I’ve heard you say several times that you either didn’t do a good 
job, or that someone else put in more time and energy. It seems to 
me that you feel inadequate a lot of the time. Is that right?” 
At this point, you can also elicit childhood experiences consistent with the belief. This helps 
identify the possible origin of the belief and helps you explain it to the patient.  
 
 
In educating the patient about core beliefs, make several things clear: 
 
 
Core beliefs are only ideas. Feeling them strongly does not make them true. 
 
These beliefs started developing during childhood. The patient believes them today 
because he/she has stored evidence to support them and rejected evidence to 
contradict them. 
 
These beliefs can be tested and changed through use of the techniques that will 
be taught in therapy. 
 
Example Homework Assignments 
1. Keep a notepad with you and attempt to list automatic thoughts you have during 
the day. 
2. Use the triangle diagram to dissect three to five situations when you experienced a 
strong emotion. 
3. Create a list of assumptions and evidence for and against those assumptions. 
4. Complete the first three sections of the Thought Record for one to two  situations. 
 
Supplemental Readings 
 
Beck, J.S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford Press; 
Chapters 6, 7, 8, 10, and 11. 
 
Safran, J.D. & Greenberg, L.S. (1982). Elicitiing “hot cognitions” in cognitive 
behavioral therapy: Rationale and procedural guidelines. Canadian Psychology, 23, 83-86.  
 
Greenberg, D. & Padesky, C. A. (1995). Mind over mood: Changing the way you feel 
by changing the way you think.  New York: Guilford Press; Chapters 5, 6, 7, and 9.  
