---
page: 33
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

34 
seems to have trouble understanding the assignments, focus on more concrete and 
behavioral skills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tips for Goal Setting 
 
 
Provide Rationale for Setting Goals. 
• 
This helps the patient understand the direction of treatment and how he/she will 
be involved in the process. 
 
Example:” If you can identify what you want to change about your 
situation, we can then take steps to correct the problem.” 
 
 
Elicit Desired Outcomes.  
• 
This involves the therapist’s assisting the patient in defining goals and specifying 
reasons for coming to treatment. 
 
Example: “List a few things you would like to get out of therapy.” 
 
 
Be Specific About What the Goal Is. 
• 
Determine each goal, what the goal is attempting to target, and what the 
patient’s role is in reference to the goal.  
• 
Guide the patient towards goals that require change from him/her (vs. others). 
 
Example: ”You said that you want your wife to listen to you. Since we 
can’t really make someone do what we want, what could you do to 
help you feel heard or cope with a situation when you don’t feel 
heard?” 
 
 
State Goals in a Positive Light. 
• 
This clarifies what the patient wants to do instead of highlighting what he or she 
doesn’t want to do. 
 
Example: “List some things that you want, instead of things that you 
don’t want. For example, instead of ‘I don’t want to be depressed 
anymore,’ you could list, ‘I want to enjoy my favorite hobbies again.’” 
 
 
Weigh Advantages and Disadvantages of a Goal. 
• 
This aids in understanding the costs and benefits of the patient’s achieving the 
goal. 
• 
It may be used to motivate an ambivalent patient or identify salient goals for a 
passive patient or a patient seeking to please the therapist. 
 
Example: “What would be the benefits if you accomplished this goal? 
What might be some of the costs to you?” 
 
Define Behaviors Related to Goal. 
• 
This instructs the patient what actions to perform in relation to the goals that 
have been set. 
 
Example: “What would it look like if you were less depressed? If I saw you 
and you were feeling happy, what would I see? What do other people 
do when they are happy? What things do you think have changed in 
your life since you have been depressed? What did you used to do that 
you enjoyed that you don’t do anymore?” 
 
 
