---
page: 73
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

74 
comfortable with certain recommendations (e.g., unfolding arms) but may be uncertain or 
uncomfortable with others (e.g., closing their eyes). The following list of options can be used 
to create an effective atmosphere for relaxation-based interventions. 
 
Setting up the room: 
- 
Comfortable chair (a high-backed chair to support the patient’s neck, if possible) 
- 
Safe and relaxing room (e.g., temperature, noise, and lighting)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following sections of this module addresses three specific techniques:  progressive 
muscle relaxation, deep breathing, and imagery. You largely determine selection of a 
specific technique, but you should select it with the patient's expressed interests and 
learning preferences/abilities in mind. For example, patients who are largely somatically 
focused may prefer muscle relaxation or deep breathing. Other patients, especially those 
who appreciate the association between thoughts and mood, might be best served using 
guided imagery procedures. However, the ultimate decision of which procedure to use 
may relate to exposure to all three techniques and a trial-and-error approach. 
 
Progressive Muscle Relaxation (PMR)  
PMR consists of learning how to tense and then relax various groups of muscles all through 
the body in a sequential fashion, while paying close attention to the feelings associated 
with both tension and relaxation. Although muscle relaxation has been around for many 
years, it has become more popular recently for dealing with different anxiety and panic 
disorders. With this procedure, the patient learns how to relax and how to recognize and 
pinpoint tension and relaxation in the body to identify tension and reduce its influence 
before each reaches high levels/impairment. 
 
In teaching patients muscle relaxation, you should first explain the reason for using muscle 
relaxation and how it will benefit the patient (rationale). You should also give a full 
explanation and demonstration of how it is done.  
 
Step #1:  PMR Increases Control. 
Introduce PMR principles and procedures. PMR begins by letting the patient know that 
he/she can create sensations of relaxation and that this process of “inducing” relaxation 
begins by being able to identify and discriminate between sensations of tension and 
relaxation. 
 
Step #2:  Note the Incongruence of Tension and Relaxation. 
Inform the patient that sensations of tension and relaxation cannot occur at the same time. 
No muscles in the body can be tensed and relaxed at the same time. This principle is 
Other tips to increase stress-management effectiveness include: 
- 
Having the patient loosen tight clothing (collars, belts, shoes, etc) or remove 
glasses 
- 
Having the patient sit in a comfortable fashion (e.g., uncrossing arms and legs, 
placing feet flat on the floor) 
- 
Dimming the lights or removing bright sunshine from the room 
- 
Having the patient close his or her eyes 
- 
Asking the patient whether he or she needs a bathroom break before starting 
- 
Asking the patient to clear the mind and focus on your voice and instructions 
