---
page: 35
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

36 
Module 7: Agenda Setting 
 
Objectives 
• 
To understand the rationale for setting an agenda 
• 
To understand process of collaboratively setting an agenda 
• 
To identify and address problems with setting an agenda 
 
What is agenda setting, and why is important? 
 
Agenda setting is a collaborative process through which the therapist and patient decide 
how session time will be spent. The patient and therapist offer items they would like to 
discuss and then decide the order of items and the amount of time they will spend on 
each. Each item should be in service of treatment goals (see Module 6: Goal Setting and 
Module 4: Cognitive Behavioral Case Conceptualization and Treatment Planning). Agenda 
setting ensures session that time is well spent and that both therapist and patient have input 
into session content.  
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
An agenda should be set within the first 10 minutes of every session. Without setting an 
agenda, it is very easy for vocal patients to "run away" with the session by recounting the 
events of the past week or describing the history of a problem. It is also easy for more 
passive patients to never indicate which items are most important to them. By 
collaboratively setting an agenda, both the therapist and patient's needs are met. Setting a 
time limit for each item, increases the chance all items can be covered.  
 
Patients should be encouraged to think between sessions about what they would like to 
discuss in session. If a patient does not offer an agenda item, you can introduce an item 
and check with the patient to see if he or she feels it would be valuable to discuss.  
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
It is your responsibility to model how to set agendas for the patient. In the first few sessions, 
you will be setting the agenda because often the patient is unsure of what is being asked or 
what to discuss in therapy. You can help the patient become more comfortable with setting 
his or her own agenda by asking questions like, “What is the main reason you came to 
therapy?” or “What is causing you the most trouble right now?”  or "What are your most 
pressing issues today?" or "What are your thoughts about the focus of today's session?"  It is 
also important to assist the patient in prioritizing issues on the agenda to give an 
acceptable amount of attention to each issue. After listing and prioritizing items, allot an 
approximate time to each item for discussion. 
 
Pay close attention to time management of issues on the agenda, and steer the patient 
away from superficial issues. As time passes, the responsibility of setting an agenda for the 
session should shift to the patient. This will eventually help him/her to set agendas, prioritize 
problems, and suggest interventions for issues encountered after completing therapy.  This 
level of increasing patient responsibility also translates into his/her overall functioning by 
increasing autonomy of functioning as the patient works toward ending treatment. 
