---
page: 104
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Script #3 – The Meadows: 
 
 
Imagine yourself walking through a lovely meadow. The breeze feels pleasant against your 
skin. You are looking out over the calm, beautiful green grass. The blades of grass are gently 
swaying in the breeze. You feel the pleasant warmth of the sun on your skin… it’s a perfectly 
comfortable temperature outside. Breathe in deeply. There is a gentle breeze, and the sun is 
shining. Big, cotton-like clouds drift by as you hear birds in the distance.  You hear the wind 
blow gently through the trees. You taste the sweet summer air on your lips. You are 
completely relaxed… there are no worries in this meadow. There is nothing to distract you 
from feeling tranquil. Worries drift away. Notice the sounds, sights, smells, and how it feels to 
be in this very special place.  
Feel the cool grass under your feet… you decide to stretch out on the soft, cushiony grass… 
breathe deeply… feel the warm air. Your body is completely relaxed, and you have an 
overall feeling of warmth and comfort. You look up as the clouds pass by slowly across the 
beautiful blue sky. You are feeling rejuvenated and completely at peace. Remember that 
you can visit this place as often as you want and that it is wonderful. Say to yourself, “I am 
relaxed here… this place is special and makes me feel peaceful and content.” 
When you are done with your visit, open your eyes and stay in your comfortable position. 
Continue to breathe smoothly, in a relaxed and rhythmic fashion; take as long as you want to 
enjoy and relax. You feel at ease knowing your special place is always available to you, and 
you find that you feel relaxed even after you leave. 
Other Guided Imagery Scene Suggestions: 
 
• 
A garden where you watch big, beautiful clouds in a blue sky, while you inhale the 
scent of flowers and feel a gentle breeze on your skin as the sunshine warms you. 
 
• 
A mountain scene where you feel calm and relaxed as you look out over the 
valley. Just you and the vegetation, and you dip your feet into a cool mountain 
stream, and let your foot rest on a big, slippery stone as the sunshine warms you 
and  the wind blows through the trees. 
 
• 
Advanced scenarios developed with assistance of patient (family, past 
experiences, etc). 
 
