---
page: 10
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 9 
 
 
 
 
Things to Consider in Evaluating Patients for Brief CBT 
1. Strong Motivation to Change 
a. Increased distress is often associated with increased motivation to change. 
b. Positive treatment expectancies (e.g., knowledge of CBT and perceived 
benefits of treatment is associated with improved outcomes). Alternatively, the 
patient does not have negative self-thoughts that might impede progress or 
change (e.g., "Seeking care means I am crazy”; "Nothing I will do can change 
things").  
c. Patients who have clear goals for treatment are good candidates. 
 
2. Time Commitment 
a. Patient is willing to devote the time needed for weekly sessions. 
b. Patient is willing to devote energy to out-of-session work (e.g., homework).  
 
3. Life Stressors 
a. Too many life stressors may lead to unfocused work and/or frequent "crisis- 
management" interventions. 
b. Patients who are supported by family and friends are more likely to benefit. 
 
4. Cognitive Functioning and Educational Level 
a. Not being able to handle the extra independent reading material and/or 
homework expectations may be a poor prognostic indicator. 
b. Patients able to work independently are more likely to carry out between-
session work. 
c. Patients who are psychologically minded are more likely to benefit from short-
term therapy.  
 
5. Severity of Psychopathology 
a. Patients with comorbid psychopathology may be more difficult to treat in short- 
term therapy. In addition, some conditions such as substance abuse or serious 
mental illness require focused and more intensive interventions. 
b. Patients with an Axis II diagnosis are also less likely to benefit from short-term CBT. 
Long-standing interpersonal issues often require longer treatment durations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplemental Materials 
Bond, F.W. & Dryden, W. (2002). Handbook of Brief Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. San 
Francisco: Wiley. 
