---
page: 75
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

76 
Step #5: Debrief After the Exercise. 
After relaxation training, question the patient about his or her reaction to the muscle- 
relaxation exercise. It is also important to make any adjustments needed to the training. 
Monitor any pain the patient experienced to adapt and improve the technique for the 
individual patient’s needs.  
 
Step #6: Continue to Practice Outside Session. 
It will be important for the patient to practice PMR at least once a day over the first week or 
two to build skills and confidence. As he or she becomes increasingly skilled at PMR, he/she 
might find it possible to relax without having to actively tense the muscles. The patient 
should use regularly scheduled homework to practice in a nondistracting environment. 
When he or she has learned to relax in a calm environment, it should be easier to relax in 
more distracting situations, whenever he or she notices tension developing.  
 
Deep-Breathing Technique 
Another physiological-based relaxation technique is deep breathing. Deep breathing 
focuses on reducing rapid and shallow (ineffective) breathing that often occurs during 
periods of stress, worry, or anxiety. Rapid and shallow breaths can lead the patient to have 
decreased oxygen in the system, which can cause hyperventilation, dizziness, 
lightheadedness, or decreased ability to concentrate. Alternatively, taking a deep, full 
breath can produce a feeling of calmness or slowing by increasing oxygen rich blood flow.  
By asking the patient to attend to breathing and changing the rate and way he or she 
breathes, you enable him or her to be able to feel more relaxed and function more -rich 
blood,) as well as the mind (feelings of calmness). It can also strengthen muscles in the 
chest and stomach, which can make it easier to breathe on a daily basis.  
Steps to Deep Breathing 
Step #1:  Introduce the patient to Deep Breathing. Indicate why Deep Breathing was 
chosen and provide an overview of the procedures and potential benefits. 
Step #2:  Ask the patient to put one hand on the abdomen, with the little finger about 1 
inch above the navel, and to place one hand on the chest.  
Step #3:  Ask the patient to pay attention to his or her breathing (pause for several seconds 
to allow the patient the opportunity to assess breathing) and ask him/her to tell you which 
hand is doing more of the moving?  Ideally, the hand on the abdomen should be moving; 
while the hand over the chest remains still. This ensures that the breaths are deep.  
Step #4:   Work with the patient to take deeper breaths by getting the hand over the 
stomach to move while having little movement of the hand over the chest. Inform the 
patient, ”Your hand on your diaphragm should move out as you inhale and in as you 
exhale.” 
 
 
 
Step #5: Ask the patient to continue slow, even, deep breaths. To pace the patient, you 
might suggest that he/she say the words in and out slowly, while taking breaths. Inhalations 
and exhalations should build to approximately 3 seconds in duration. 
NOTE: If the patient has a lung or heart condition, he/she might have difficulty 
with deep breathing. If he/she reports difficulty, slow the process down and 
help him/her to maximize the exercise comfortably.  
