---
page: 82
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Troubleshooting End of Treatment 
 
Give Yourself Adequate Time to End Treatment. 
Plan on an entire session devoted to ending treatment, wrapping up, and maintaining 
changes.  It is highly recommended that you not introduce new concepts during the final 
session, as new issues may arise; and ending treatment during the session may become 
impossible. 
 
Give the Patient Credit. 
Depressed or anxious patients often attribute positive change to external entities and 
negative change to themselves. Therefore, at the end of treatment, discuss the patient’s 
progress (using objective data, such as symptom-rating scales, when available), praise the 
patient, and emphasize his or her role in positive changes.  
 
Respond to Concerns. 
Checking in with the patient regularly about questions or concerns about ending treatment 
helps maintain the therapeutic relationship and offset negative emotions about treatment 
that could result in negative outcomes, such as feeling abandoned. If the patient seems 
particularly concerned about ending treatment, he or she could use a thought record to 
identify and challenge dysfunctional thoughts associated with leaving therapy.  
 
Plan Self-Management Time. 
Patients may be interested in planning self-management time when preparing for the end 
of treatment. Self-management times are a few minutes each week that the patient sets 
aside, once therapy is complete, to check mood and use of skills and problem solve 
situations or feelings that may be negatively affecting their mood. These times last 
approximately 10-15 minutes and follow a structure similar to therapy. Self-management 
time is beneficial because it is free, can be conducted at and when and where it is 
convenient for the patient, and helps prevent relapse. A self-management worksheet (see 
p. 82) may be used during these times.  
 
Booster Sessions 
Booster sessions can be scheduled approximately 1 month following the end of treatment 
and then as needed thereafter. During a booster session, you: 
• 
Check in with the patient about his/her self-management of symptoms and stressors. 
• 
Refresh skills learned in therapy. 
Relapse-Prevention Questions 
 
1) When I feel (symptom), I will    (tool learned in therapy). 
2) If _(stressor)___, I will    (tool learned in therapy). 
 
Example:  
When I feel sad for 2 days, I will go for a walk and call a friend to have lunch. 
 
When I feel depressed for a month, I will schedule an appointment with my primary 
care physician/mental health provider. 
 
If my boyfriend breaks up with me, I will do a thought record to evaluate any 
dysfunctional thoughts.  
