---
page: 52
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

53 
Cognitive Distortions 
 
1. All-or-nothing thinking: Viewing situations on one extreme or another instead of on a 
continuum. 
Ex. “If my child does bad things, it’s because I am a bad parent.” 
 
2. Catastrophizing: Predicting only negative outcomes for the future. 
Ex. “If I fail my final, my life will be over.” 
 
3. Disqualifying or discounting the positive: Telling yourself that the good things that happen 
to you don’t count.  
Ex. “My daughter told her friend that I was the best Dad in the world, but I’m sure 
she was just being nice.” 
 
4. Emotional reasoning: Letting one’s feeling about something overrule facts to the 
contrary. 
Ex. “Even though Steve is here at work late every day, I know I work harder than 
anyone else at my job.” 
 
5. Labeling: Giving someone or something a label without finding out more about it/them. 
Ex. “My daughter would never do anything I disapproved of.” 
 
6. Magnification/minimization: Emphasizing the negative or playing down the positive of a 
situation. 
Ex. “My professor said he made some corrections on my paper, so I know I’ll 
probably fail the class.” 
 
7. Mental filter/tunnel vision: Placing all one’s attention o, or seeing only, the negatives of a 
situation. 
Ex. “My husband says he wishes I was better at housekeeping, so I must be a lousy 
wife.” 
 
8. Mind reading: Believing you know what others are thinking. 
Ex. “My house was dirty when my friends came over, so I know they think I’m a 
slob.” 
Ex. “My daughter’s boyfriend got suspended from school. He’s a loser and won’t 
ever amount to anything.” 
 
9. Overgeneralization: Making an overall negative conclusion beyond the current situation. 
Ex. “My husband didn’t kiss me when he came home this evening. Maybe he 
doesn’t love me anymore.” 
 
10. Personalization: Thinking the negative behavior of others has something to do with you. 
Ex. “My daughter has been pretty quiet today. I wonder what I did to upset her.” 
 
11. “Should” and “must” statements: Having a concrete idea of how people should behave. 
Ex “I should get all A’s to be a good student.” 
 
