---
page: 28
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

29 
The cognitive model challenges this subjective experience and suggests, instead, that it is 
the thoughts we have about situations that give rise to emotions. Individuals who are 
depressed or anxious tend to display patterns of dysfunctional or “inaccurate” thinking. In 
the cognitive elements of CBT, the therapist trains the patient in specific skills that help the 
patient learn to improve his/her mood and change behavior by modifying the way hr or 
she thinks about situations. A key tool in identifying and examining the associations between 
thoughts, feelings, and situations is the thought record, which we will discuss in detail in 
Module 10: Challenging Automatic Thoughts. 
 
 
 
The behavioral aspect of CBT addresses how behaviors influence mood. The therapist works 
with the patient to increase behaviors to improve mood and reduce behaviors associated 
with negative mood. As depicted in the figure below, changing behaviors can change 
feelings as well as thoughts. The associations among behaviors, thoughts, and feeling in CBT 
are captured by social learning theory, which suggests that the likelihood of a behavior is 
determined by its consequences. For example, social learning theory implies that a positive 
behavior, such as exercise, will occur more frequently if a patient experiences pleasure and 
a sense of satisfaction after completing physical activity. This is the premise of behavioral 
activation (see Module 11).  
 
  
