---
page: 56
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

57 
There will not always be an immediate change to a patient’s mood after a thought record 
is completed. It might be necessary to assess why there is no change. It could be attributed 
to the patient’s deeply rooted belief in the automatic thought, to an unchanged underlying 
core belief, or to additional automatic thoughts that have not been evaluated. It is 
necessary to ask: Why was there no mood change after completion of the Thought 
Record? These other questions will also be helpful. 
 
 
Have I described the situation in enough detail? 
 
Did I identify and rate the right moods? 
 
Is the thought I am testing an automatic thought? 
 
Do I believe a dysfunctional core belief is driving this thought? 
 
Did I list multiple thoughts? Do I need more information for each individual thought? 
 
Is there a stronger automatic thought that I have not put in my Thought Record? 
 
Do I believe the alternative thought? What other alternative thoughts are available? 
 
If thought/belief testing is ineffective in reducing negative mood, you can also explore the 
advantages and disadvantages of maintaining a thought/belief. As we know, there are 
many disadvantages to negative beliefs we have, but there are also advantages. The 
patient’s perceptions of the advantages may be obstructing the change process. 
Understanding the function of the thought/belief for the patient may be useful in clarifying 
why certain thoughts/beliefs are resistant to modification. The therapist should evaluate 
both the advantages and disadvantages of a patient’s assumptions and beliefs, but in 
doing so work to diminish the advantages and highlight the disadvantages. 
 
Often, when working to modify thoughts and beliefs, the patient may find evidence that 
supports the negative belief instead of evidence that contradicts it. If there is a good 
amount of evidence to support that negative core belief, then problem solving, rather then 
thought testing, is an appropriate strategy (see Module 12). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Seven Tips for Effective DTRs 
 
1. 
You must have mastered the use of DTR before introducing it to patients. 
2. 
Reinforce and make sure that the patient believes in the cognitive model being used. 
3. 
Teach the DTR in two sections: (1) The first three columns; Situation, Automatic 
thought(s), and Emotion(s), and (2) the last four columns; Evidence for and against 
thought, Alternative response, and New rating of emotion. 
4. 
Use the patient’s exact words when recording thoughts and feelings. Working with 
thoughts verbatim preserves the emotions or personal meaning for each thought. 
5. 
The patient should be able to adequately complete the first three columns of the DTR 
before learning about the last four columns. 
6. 
Completing a DTR is a skill and, like other Brief CBT skills, requires practice. Success 
depends on the patient’s understanding of the steps. Encourage the patient to take 
time with the skill and work through any frustration. 
7. 
If the patient is not collaborative in completing the DTR in session or does not complete 
DTR homework, it is possible that he or she might have automatic thoughts about this 
type of exercise. Ask the patient to create a thought record of the DTR experience. 
