---
page: 48
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

49 
Deciding Which Automatic Thoughts to Focus On 
Once a patient becomes aware of how many automatic thoughts he/she has, he/she may 
feel overwhelmed by their sheer number. Uncovering one thought may lead to another 
and so on. Therefore, it is important to focus on the most important automatic thoughts and 
the hot thoughts that are likely to bring about the greatest change. There are several things 
a patient can do once he or she has identified an automatic thought. The patient can 
decide to focus on that thought, choose another thought associated with the situation, or 
move on to another topic if he/she feels that there is a more powerful thought that he/she 
would like to tackle. 
 
You can help the patient choose automatic thoughts to focus on by frequently checking: 
 
Goals for this session 
 
Patient’s agenda items and addressing those problems 
 
The importance of the thought chosen in reaching therapeutic goals 
 
Another technique is to identify a few automatic thoughts and then rate them on a scale of 
0-100, based on how intense the associated feeling is (rate the feeling from 0-100), and how 
much he/she believes the thought (rate believability from 0-100). This helps to quantify 
which automatic thoughts are most important. The thoughts with the strongest ratings 
should be considered first.  
 
Dysfunctional automatic thoughts often fall into certain categories. These are common 
"cognitive distortions" or thinking errors. Identifying patterns of cognitive distortions in the 
patient's thought records or speech is instrumental for choosing a hot thought, case 
conceptualization, and treatment planning. A patient often has one or two common 
patterns of maladaptive thinking. Identifying these patterns helps him/her identify them 
when they come up and provides you an opportunity to intervene on a thought triggered 
in multiple situations. Therefore, changing a particular thought that is part of a dysfunctional 
thinking pattern (e.g., tendency to ignore the positive) may have multiple benefits for the 
patient. For list of common thinking errors, see the Cognitive Distortion worksheet (page 49). 
 
Intermediate Beliefs 
To identify an intermediate belief, you must first know how to recognize a patient’s 
automatic thoughts. You can do this by identifying an automatic thought and then 
attempting to identify an attitude or assumption the patient feels about him-/herself, the 
future, others, or the world. These assumptions can be identified by listening for themes in 
the patient’s thoughts and behavior. You can use several techniques to identify an 
intermediate belief: 
 
 
Look for an intermediate belief that comes in the form of a patient’s automatic 
thought. 
 
Provide the first part of an assumption (“If x…”), and enlist the help of the patient to 
complete it. 
 
Elicit a rule or an attitude from the patient, and change it into an assumption. 
 
Look for themes in the patient’s automatic thoughts. Either come up with a 
hypothesis, or ask the patient to identify a theme. 
 
Ask the patient directly about his or her beliefs. 
 
Have the patient complete a questionnaire or inventory that will help identify his/her 
beliefs (e.g., Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale). 
 
