---
page: 102
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

106 
Deep-Breathing Technique 
 
Step #1:  Put one hand on your abdomen, with the little finger about 1 inch above the 
navel, and place one hand on your chest.  
 
Step #2:  Pay attention to your breathing (pause for several seconds to assess your 
breathing). Ideally, the hand on the abdomen should be moving, while the hand over the 
chest remains still. This ensures that the breaths are deep.  
 
Step #3:   Take deeper breaths by getting the hand over the stomach to move, while 
having little movement of the hand over the chest.  
 
NOTE:  If you have a lung or heart condition and you are having difficulty with this exercise, 
slow the process down to your comfort level.   
 
Step #4: Continue your slow, even, deep breaths. To pace yourself, you can say the words in 
and out slowly while taking breaths. Inhalations and exhalations should build to 
approximately 3 seconds in duration. 
 
Step #5:  Repeat the breathing exercise three or more times. 
 
Other tips for deep breathing: 
1) Inhale through your nose and out your mouth. 
2) Purse your lips (as if blowing out hot soup) while exhaling. 
3) Do not pause between inhales and exhales. 
4) Close your eyes during the exercise. 
5) Use mantra such as “relax” during each exhale 
6) Pair up deep breathing with imagery once you have mastered the breathing skills. 
7) REMEMBER: Deep breathing is a portable skill that can be used in a variety of 
situations and relatively without notice of others. 
 
 
