---
page: 9
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 8 
substance use requires a higher level of care and more comprehensive treatment than is 
available in a brief format. However, Brief CBT could be used with Axis II and comorbid 
patients in dealing with specific negative behaviors or in conjunction with more intensive 
treatment.  
 
Examples of Suitable and Unsuitable Problems for Brief CBT 
 
Problem 
Brief CBT? 
Anxiety 
Depression 
Assertiveness 
Diet 
Exercise 
Social Isolation 
Specific Phobia 
Grief/Bereavement 
New Diagnosis of COPD 
Coping with Chemotherapy 
Caregiver Burden 
Alcohol Dependence 
Paranoid Personality Disorder 
Crisis Intervention 
Chronic PTSD 
Divorce 
Somatoform Disorder 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Maybe 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Maybe 
No 
Maybe 
No 
 
 
 
 
 
 
? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
? 
 
? 
 
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Therapist Considerations 
It is important to be adequately skilled to evoke change in a patient’s life in a short amount 
of time. You should periodically assess and seek supervision/consultation regarding your 
capabilities in the process and content of Brief CBT. 
 
The following are general therapist skills and abilities required for Brief CBT: 
 
 
Capability to establish a strong working relationship quickly 
 
Thorough knowledge of the treatments used 
 
Skill in  structuring sessions and homework material to address all problems 
 
Skill in presenting material clearly and concisely with specific examples for each of 
the patient’s issues 
 
Therapist interpersonal/personality variables:  ability to be assertive, directive, 
nonjudgmental and collaborative 
 
Assessing the Patient 
It is necessary to choose patients who are appropriate for Brief CBT versus traditional CBT or 
other types of therapy. Below are important points to consider in selecting patients for Brief 
CBT. This assessment should precede the treatment phase and may be based on the intake 
assessment, input from the referral source, or a review of the medical chart. 
 
