---
page: 8
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 7 
Potential Brief CBT Session Structure 
 
 
Session Content 
Possible Modules 
Session 1 
Orient the Patient to CBT. 
Assess Patient Concerns. 
Set Initial Treatment Plan/Goals. 
Module 
Module 
Module 
5: 
4: 
6: 
Orienting the Patient 
Case Conceptualization 
Goal Setting 
Session 2 
Assess Patient Concerns (cont'd). 
Set Initial Goals (cont'd) 
Module 
Module 
4: 
6: 
Case Conceptualization 
Goal Setting 
 
 
Or 
 
Begin Intervention Techniques.  
Technique Modules 9-13:  
Maladaptive Thoughts, Behavioral 
Activation, Problem Solving, 
Relaxation    
Session 3 
Begin/Continue Intervention Techniques 
Technique Modules 9-13 
Session 4 
Continue 
Re-assess 
Intervention Techniques. 
Goals/Treatment Plan. 
Technique Modules 9-13 
Module 4: Case Conceptualization 
Module 6: Goal Setting 
Session 5 
Continue/ Refine Intervention Techniques. 
Technique Modules 9-13 
Session 6 
Continue Intervention Techniques. 
Technique Modules 9-13 
Session 7 
Continue Intervention Techniques. 
Discuss Ending Treatment and Prepare 
Maintaining Changes. 
for 
Technique Modules 9-13 
Module 14: Ending Treatment 
Maintaining Changes 
and 
Session 8 
End Treatment and Help Patient to 
Module 14: Ending Treatment and 
Maintain Changes. 
Maintaining Changes 
  
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
Certain problems are more appropriate for Brief CBT than others. The following table 
summarizes problems that may and may not be conducive to Brief CBT. Problems 
amenable to Brief CBT include, but are not limited to, adjustment, anxiety, and depressive 
disorders. Therapy also may be useful for problems that target specific symptoms (e.g., 
depressive thinking) or lifestyle changes (e.g., problem solving, relaxation), whether or not 
these issues are part of a formal psychiatric diagnosis. 
 
Brief CBT is particularly useful in a primary care setting for patients with anxiety and 
depression associated with a medical condition. Because these individuals often face 
acute rather than chronic mental health issues and have many coping strategies already in 
place, Brief CBT can be used to enhance adjustment. Issues that may be addressed in 
primary care with Brief CBT include, but are not limited to, diet, exercise, medication 
compliance, mental health issues associated with a medical condition, and coping with a 
chronic illness or new diagnosis.  
 
Other problems may not be suitable for the use of Brief CBT or may complicate a 
straightforward application of Brief CBT. Axis II disorders such as Borderline Personality 
Disorder or Antisocial Personality Disorder typically are not appropriate for a shortened 
therapeutic experience because of the pervasive social, psychological, and relational 
problems individuals with these disorders experience. Patients exhibiting comorbid 
conditions or problems also may not be appropriate because the presence of a second 
issue may impede progress in therapy. For example, an individual with substance 
dependence comorbid with major depression may not be appropriate because the 
