---
page: 108
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

114 
Sample Brief CBT Outline #1 
 
Patient Description 
Maria is a 60-year-old airline pilot who is about to retire from 15 years of flying. Maria was 
diagnosed with Type II diabetes 5 years ago and has had difficulties maintaining her health 
since that time. She has suffered bouts of severe fatigue and dizziness. Maria says that flying 
is her “first love,” but that it has become increasingly dangerous for her to fly. She states that 
she “feels like a failure” because she worked so hard to become a pilot and now “it is over.” 
Maria says that she is usually a very active person but has lost interest in her hobbies and 
doesn’t have the energy to do them, anyway. She says that her depression has been 
worsened by her deteriorating health. 
 
Case Conceptualization: Maria is experiencing depression in response to a diagnosis of 
diabetes. She is unsure how to change her thoughts and behaviors to adjust to her new 
medical condition. Therapy will aid her adjustment by targeting dysfunctional thoughts 
about being a “failure” and exploring and increasing the things that she enjoys and feels a 
sense of achievement from, both for work and recreation. 
 
Goals 
Behavioral Activation 
Identifying Maladaptive Thoughts/Beliefs 
Challenging Maladaptive Thoughts/Beliefs 
 
Session 1 
Establish relationship. 
Identify Maria’s presenting problem. 
Introduce Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. 
Introduce the Cognitive-Behavioral Model. 
Describe Problem in Context of Model. 
Set Goals. 
Receive Feedback from Maria. 
 
Session 2 
Check Mood. 
Introduce Behavioral Activation, and Explore Potential Activities to Improve Mood. 
Set Homework: Mood and Activity Tracking. 
Receive Feedback From Maria. 
 
Session 3 
Check Mood. 
Review Mood and Activity Tracking.  
Use Tracking Sheet to Plan Where and What Behavioral Activation Will Be Employed. 
Troubleshoot Completing Activity. 
Assign Homework: 1 Behavioral-Activation Exercise. 
Receive Feedback From Maria. 
 
 
 
 
 
