---
page: 39
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

40 
Module 8: Homework 
 
Objectives 
• 
To understand how homework is introduced and used in Brief CBT 
• 
To understand techniques for increasing homework utility and compliance 
 
What is homework, and why is it a central part of CBT? 
 
Homework is an essential and effective component of Brief CBT. Because of the condensed 
number of sessions in Brief CBT, assignments such as readings, behavior monitoring, and 
practicing new skills should be given to the patient to practice and use outside sessions. 
Homework assignments facilitate patient skill acquisition, treatment compliance, and 
symptom reduction by integrating the concepts learned in sessions into daily life.   
Homework is a key mechanism for facilitating between-session work and progress. 
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
Give homework assignments throughout treatment. The nature and frequency of 
assignments is left to your discretion. Consider patient characteristics when assigning 
homework, specifically reading ability, cognitive functioning, level of distress, and 
motivation. During the beginning stage of therapy, suggest homework; but, as therapy 
progresses, encourage the patient to generate between-session activities. This helps the 
patient to continue to use skills outside therapy and after the end of treatment. Some 
patients may be hesitant to participate in homework assignments, so it is your responsibility 
to be open to patient feedback about assignments, give reasons for each task, and 
personalize homework assignments for each patient. 
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Seven Tips for Setting Homework 
 
1. One Size Does Not Fit All. 
Always tailor assignments to patients. Their reading level, desire to change, cognitive 
functioning, and, even, stage of life determine how much and what type of homework 
assignment fits them best. For example, a single, working mother who is also a full-time 
student may not have time to read a complete book as a bibliotherapy assignment. 
Assigning her a small part of the book or an article may be more reasonable. Breaking 
assignments down into smaller parts is also useful. Always consider the patient’s diagnosis 
and presenting problem when assigning homework and ask yourself  
 
 
 
 
 
2. Explain In Detail. 
Knowing the reason for an assignment and how it relates to overall treatment goals helps 
the patient understand why he/she is doing the assignment and also may encourage 
him/her to complete it. Most patients are interested in how certain activities may improve 
their situation or relieve their symptoms. Explain assignments in the context of treatment 
goals and the cognitive model to enhance patient buy-in to the tasks. 
“Can the patient handle this homework, and will it be beneficial to his/her growth?” 
“Could there be a negative result from this assignment; and, if so, is the patient 
prepared to handle it outside session?” 
