---
page: 22
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 21 
heartbeat or stomachache), a behavioral component (what a patient does or doesn’t do), 
and a cognitive component (thoughts or beliefs). 
 
Consequences:  Consequences are categorized as being either positive or negative. 
Positive consequences increase the chances that a behavior will be repeated through the 
experience of something pleasant or the removal of something negative (e.g., do not have 
to do a chore). Negative consequences decrease the occurrence of a behavior, either by 
the presence of something noxious (e.g., being yelled at) or the absence of something 
desired (e.g., a child being grounded from watching TV). Patients tend to repeat behaviors 
that result in something positive or the removal of something negative.  
 
Identifying Consequences. Similarly to identifying antecedents, when you and a patient are 
attempting to identify the consequences of a certain behavior, it is important to explore all 
components of each consequence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When completing a functional assessment, both short- and long-term consequences are 
examined. Short-term consequences tend to be behavioral reinforcers, while long-term 
consequences tend to be negative outcomes. In the case of addiction, the short-term 
consequence of using a substance is intoxication, or escape from a negative mood; the 
long-term consequence may be legal trouble, family problems, or a hangover. 
Understanding the positive and negative consequences of a behavior for a patient helps 
design the timing and nature of intervention. For example, in the case above, an 
intervention would need to follow a noxious antecedent to offset the negative mood it 
causes. Treating the negative mood would then decrease the need for escape through 
substance use. A variety of questions may be used to elucidate a short-term consequence:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“How do you feel immediately after this occurs?” (Affective) 
“Do you have any bodily sensations after this happens, like trembling?” (Somatic) 
“How do you react after this behavior occurs? (Behavioral) 
“What do you think about after this happens?” (Cognitive) 
“Are you in a different place when this behavior ends?” (Contextual) 
“Are there any people who make this behavior worse? Make it better?” (Relational) 
“Does this behavior get you attention in some way?” 
“What good things happen as a result of this behavior?” 
“Does this help you in some way?” 
“Do you feel a certain ‘rush’ from doing this?” 
“Does this behavior help you avoid something you don’t want to do?” 
Case Conceptualization Step 2: Clinical Hypotheses and Treatment Plan  
 
Establishing focused clinical hypotheses based upon the information obtained in Case 
Conceptualization Step #1 serves to direct intervention options and possible treatment 
techniques. These hypotheses may require adaptation as new information becomes 
available during treatment. Clinical hypotheses can either be used exclusively by the 
therapist or can be shared with patients. Generally, sharing this information only improves 
trust and communication between patient and therapist. 
