---
page: 66
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

67 
 reacting to emotions (e.g., depression). This problem may be better served using 
another skill (e.g., maladaptive thoughts module).  
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts)  
 
Problem-Solving Therapy (PST) 
In problem-solving therapy, it is important that you first educate the patient about the 
problem-solving strategies that will be used during sessions. To enable the patient to use the 
strategies after therapy ends, teach him/her to carefully examine a problem, create a list of 
solutions, and make decisions about which strategies are appropriate for a variety of 
problems.  
 
General guidelines for using problem-solving strategies are as follows: 
 
 
Training should be tailored and specific to each patient. 
 
Obtain a thorough assessment of the problem before proceeding with problem-
solving therapy. 
 
Encourage the patient to try as many solutions as possible. 
 
Decide whether the patient requires more problem-solving work or more emotional 
work to experience growth through the therapeutic process. 
 
Strategies for Effective Problem Solving 
 
The SOLVED technique helps guide you through the steps to most effectively identify and 
solve problems in your life. 
 
S (Selecting a Problem) … the patient would like to solve.  
Ask the patient to think about situations when he or she feels distress or difficulty problem 
solving. If planning does not seem to be possible, suggest a different therapeutic technique 
(e.g., changing maladaptive thoughts). The decision to remain with problem solving or 
move to a different skill is largely dependent on you to direct. 
 
O (Opening Your Mind to All Solutions) 
Here, it is important to be as broad as possible. You are encouraged to work with patients to 
“brainstorm” all possible solutions. Writing may be particularly helpful for some patients. Even 
ideas that seem ridiculous at first may generate realistic solutions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For example, Bertha’s family would often drop by several times a week without calling 
beforehand and expect her to care for their children. She enjoyed this, but felt tired many 
times and was beginning to get concerned about her ability to continue child sitting at such 
a frequent pace. Her first idea was to tell them she could no longer baby-sit. Although she 
did not like this idea, it led her to consider related ideas, such as telling them they had to call 
beforehand to make sure she felt up to the task. 
Tips for ge nerating possible solutions: 
• 
As k the patient to think about advice he or she would give someone else with this 
pro blem.  
• 
As k the patient to examine the ways he or she have handled similar situations.  
• 
Ins truct the patient to consult with a close friend or relative for additional solutions.  
