---
page: 77
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

78 
How Guided Imagery Works 
Research has shown that the mind can actually affect how the body functions. It seems the 
body may not know the difference between an actual event and a thought. Guided 
imagery uses the power of the brain—images and the perception that you are either 
somewhere else or in a different state of mind—to increase pleasant experiences and 
performance to promote wellness and health. On the flip side, imagery helps to reduce 
stress tension and anxiety by changing thoughts and emotions or through distraction.  
Imagery is commonly referred to as guided imagery. Guided imagery refers to a process 
whereby you facilitates or guide the initial images the patient uses. The following section 
describes how you can guide the patient into the effective use of imagery for relaxation or 
performance improvement. 
Step #1:  Introduce Imagery. 
Introduce imagery to the patient, pointing out the power of the brain or thoughts and how 
images, when accessed correctly, can actually change physical and emotional states.  
Step #2:  Identify the Desired Outcomes, Such as Decreased Anxiety, Increased Focus, 
Distraction. 
Step #3:  Develop an Image or Scene. 
Work with the patient on the third step to identify a situation, either in the past or a place 
he/she would like to be, that both you and the patient feel might benefit or produce the 
desired outcome. Sample imagery scripts are provided below and can be used if the 
patient has difficulty creating a personal situation. Selection of a powerful image is critical 
to the success of this technique. Selection of an image that the patient is able to fully 
embrace increases the odds of treatment success. Selection of a “weak” image (e.g., not 
viewed as important by the patient or unable to be fully visualized) will likely lead to 
treatment failure. 
Step #4:  Increase Vividness of the Image. 
To ensure that patients find a “strong” image, ask them to explore as many senses as 
possible to increase vividness of the image. For example, when imagining a glass of 
lemonade, imagine holding a glass that feels icy and cold, visualize the color of the 
lemonade, think of the fresh citrus smell, and finally think of how the lemonade tastes. This is 
an example of imagery that uses multiple senses and increases vividness of the image.  
Increasing vividness is largely a matter of increasing the details the patient experiences. The 
more details described by the patient, the more powerful the technique.  
Step #5:  Ask the Patient if He or She Notices Any Changes After the Imagery Exercise. Ask 
for general feedback about the technique. 
Step #6:  Repeat the Imagery Exercise Until the Patient Reports Skill Understanding and 
Benefit. 
Step #7:  Ask the Patient to Identify Situations When Imagery Might Be Appropriate. Expand 
upon the patient’s responses by adding other situations (e.g., how the technique can be 
used). 
Step #8:  Continue Practice Outside Session. Work with the patient to set a homework 
assignment that encourages application of imagery to situations when the patient feels 
stress or feels that imagery might be beneficial. 
