---
page: 23
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 22 
A focused clinical hypothesis for a person with depression might be as follows: 
"Since your retirement, you have experienced many life transitions and numerous losses 
(e.g., financial, social, functional). Your thoughts, which used to be largely positive and 
ambitious, are now negative and pessimistic; and you appear to be fearful of the future. In 
reaction to your mood and negative thoughts, you have reduced the number of your 
activities; and you have begun to withdraw from your family." 
   
The end result of case conceptualization is formation of a treatment plan, an agreed-upon 
strategy between patient and therapist that gives direction to the therapeutic process. A 
treatment plan should include a presentation of the causes of the patient's current 
difficulties (e.g., cognitive and behavioral factors creating symptoms or difficulties) and a 
specific plan. When presenting the plan, actively involve the patient and incorporate his or 
her feedback. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example: “In the brief amount of time we have spent together, it appears that we have 
identified some thoughts and behaviors that are likely contributing to your current difficulties. 
In particular, your view of yourself and your future are quite negative, and you have stopped 
doing many things that used to bring you pleasure. My recommendation would be to further 
explore your thoughts and see if we can find a more balanced view of your current 
difficulties. I would also like to talk with you more about re-engaging in activities you used to 
find pleasurable. What do you think about these targets for therapy?"   
Case Conceptualization Step 3: Identifying Possible Treatment Obstacles  
 
It is not uncommon for patients to simply agree with recommendations from their therapist. 
However, it is important to identify potential obstacles to treatment early on to avoid 
setbacks or treatment failures. Asking for frequent feedback from the patient helps to 
reduce over-compliance and serves to include the patient in a collaborative and active 
treatment approach. As part of this collaborative venture, it is important to ask the patient 
whether he or she sees any potential obstacles to treatment. Barriers might include logistic 
difficulties (financial, travel), personal beliefs (concerns about stigma, effectiveness of 
treatment) or interpersonal issues (family not supportive of therapy). 
Tips for Using Case Conceptualization in Brief Therapy 
 
 
Case conceptualization in Brief CBT is much the same as with longer forms of 
treatment with the following exceptions: 
o 
Brief therapy leaves little room for delays in case formulation. 
o 
The time constraints of brief therapy must be considered in all treatment/goal- 
setting endeavors. Treatment goals should be reasonable, measurable and as 
simple as possible.  
o 
Because of limited time, the focus of treatment in Brief CBT also generally limits 
the depth of cognitive interventions. For example, it is quite frequent to 
address automatic thoughts and intermediate beliefs as foci of treatment, 
while addressing core beliefs is often difficult. If core beliefs are addressed, this 
usually occurs indirectly through more surface-level intervention techniques or 
at a time when the patient is particularly ready for such work. 
