---
page: 11
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 10 
Module 2: Using Supervision 
 
Objectives 
 
To discuss the importance of supervision / consultation in CBT training 
 
To provide information on how to use clinical supervision and consultation in CBT 
training 
 
To outline various models of supervision / consultation in CBT training 
 
To provide tips on selecting a supervisor / consultant 
 
Introduction 
 
Knowledge about psychotherapy can be broken down into two broad domains – 1) 
knowledge of concepts and 2) knowledge of how to apply concepts. Information 
contained in this manual will provide you with a basic knowledge of CBT concepts and will 
attempt to provide you with practical tips on how to use these concepts. However, 
because the provision of CBT is highly variable, depending on the therapist, patient, and 
treatment setting, applications of CBT will need to be customized and practiced in real- 
world settings. This manual is therefore only the first step toward obtaining information and 
knowledge about how best to apply CBT principles to actual clinical patients. Supervision 
and consultation are two methods to advance CBT practice skills through routine feedback 
and interaction with a CBT trainer. 
 
What is Supervision, and why Is It Important to CBT? 
 
Supervision is designed to a) foster the supervisee's development and b) ensure patient 
welfare and safety by monitoring patient care – see following table: 
 
Goals and Focus of Supervision 
 
For the Supervisee 
□ 
□ 
□ 
□ 
Provides therapist performance feedback 
Provides guidance and acquisition of alternative viewpoints 
Contributes to the process of forming a therapist's identity 
Serves as a secure base to explore applications and 
therapeutic principles 
For the Patient 
□ 
     
     
     
To 
      
      
      
ensure that patients receive acceptable care 
 - Therapists do no harm 
 - Therapists possesses sufficient skills 
 - Those who lack skills are provided with remediation 
Supervision is NOT 
Therapy … although supervision may involve an 
therapist's personal experiences, such a focus is 
that influence the therapist's professional work. 
exploration 
restricted to 
of a 
issues 
 
Supervision versus Consultation 
There is a difference between supervision and consultation. Whereas supervision involves 
the direct oversight of clinical cases over a period of time (often involving evaluation of the 
clinician), consultation refers to a relationship that is designed to assist in professional 
development but does not involve formal oversight of clinical cases and may or may not 
continue over time. In essence, consultation involves a growth-oriented discussion of cases 
or issues without oversight or evaluation.  
 
