---
page: 53
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

54 
Module 10: Challenging Maladaptive Thoughts and Beliefs 
 
Objectives 
• 
To learn techniques for addressing dysfunctional thoughts and beliefs 
• 
To understand and manage potential difficulties using thought records 
 
What are the techniques for challenging maladaptive thought, and why are these 
techniques important for Brief CBT? 
 
Several techniques can be used to challenge dysfunctional thoughts or beliefs. Most are 
used in conjunction with a thought record. Challenging thoughts and beliefs in a 
collaborative, Socratic way allows patients to use their own statements to counter 
dysfunctional thinking. Generating counter-statements based on the data patients bring to 
session increases the believability of the thoughts/beliefs and, thus, the effectiveness of the 
counter thoughts/beliefs.  
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
Typically dysfunctional automatic thoughts are the first targets in the cognitive component 
of CBT. Following the introduction of the cognitive model (see Module 5: Orienting patient 
to Brief CBT), and skills for identifying automatic hot thoughts and their accompanying 
emotions (see Module 9: Identifying Maladaptive Thoughts and Beliefs), techniques for 
challenging hot thoughts are introduced. These techniques should immediately follow the 
session on identifying hot thoughts, to build continuity and familiarity with the skill set and 
instill hope of change after identifying problematic thinking patterns. Although intermediate 
and core beliefs will be challenged in advanced stages of therapy, the techniques are 
similar for challenging thoughts. Many techniques below can be used interchangeably for 
challenging thoughts or beliefs. Brief CBT session time is best used for modifying thoughts or 
beliefs that are tightly held and strongly believed. 
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Socratic questioning is a therapist stance for questioning maladaptive thoughts and beliefs. 
This process involves asking a series of open-ended, brief questions that guide the patient to 
discover his/her idiosyncratic thoughts, feelings, or behaviors associated with a particular 
situation. Socratic questioning is nonjudgmental but is based on the therapist’s insight that 
the original premise of a thought or belief may be untrue; therefore, the questions are 
designed to expose the dysfunctional thought or belief so that it may be challenged.  
 
The Dysfunctional Thought Record (DTR) is the staple of cognitive work in Brief CBT. The first 
three columns (see Thought Record handout on p. 55) are used for identifying troubling 
situations and the accompanying emotions and dysfunctional thoughts. These three 
columns are used in conjunction with Module 8, in that when the situation thought  
feeling triangle is unfolded, it forms the first three columns of a DTR (see figure).  
 
 
 
