---
page: 32
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example 
Goal: Learn two cognitive and two behavioral strategies for coping with stress. 
 Operational Cognitive Goals 
o 
Learn and use thought testing and problem solving to manage 
anxious thoughts/situations 
 Operational Behavioral Goals 
o 
Plan and complete one pleasant or social activity per week 
Assessing Facilitators, Barriers, Importance and Confidence 
 
Once a goal or multiple goals have been established, it is critical to assess the patient's 
situation and attitudes about the goals.  For example, ask whether there are aspects of the 
patient's life that may facilitate or inhibit the goal. A strong family and social-support system 
may help a patient to reach his or her goal, but a functional limitation may create an 
obstacle.  Explore facilitators and barriers and discuss strategies to maximize the chance of 
goal attainment.   
 
Assessments of importance and confidence are also important.  Ask the patient to rate the 
importance of the goal on a scale of 0 to 100 (where 0 is not important and 100 is very 
important).  Discuss ratings lower than 60 or so, and refine goals to increase meaning.  
Similarly, ask the patient to rate his/her confidence in obtaining the goal.  Here, confidence 
ratings could be a little lower but would hopefully increase as treatment progresses. 
 
Troubleshooting Goal Setting  
 
Some clues that goals may need modification are worsening symptoms, no change in 
symptoms, patient failure to complete homework (see Module 8: Homework), and 
patient/collateral report that the patient is not benefitting from treatment. In these cases, it 
is important to revisit initial goals with the patient and elicit his/her feedback about the 
progress of therapy (“What do you find helpful?”). Often, too-ambitious goals need to be 
modified. In these cases, it is important to frame the revision in terms of taking small steps 
towards lasting change, normalize the difficulty of making changes when depressed or 
anxious, and join the patient (“I think I may have gotten a little ahead of myself; let’s modify 
these a little, so that they can be the most help for you”; “I may have missed the mark on 
this one; what do you think about adding/changing/removing a goal?”). Goal revision 
should not imply to the patient that he/she has failed in therapy. It is an opportunity to 
model functional change in response to changing situations. 
 
If the patient is worsening, discuss any changes in context (e.g., relationship, work, sleep, 
medication compliance, physical health) the patient is experiencing. Create a new goal 
pertinent to what the patient believes is worsening and what might help. At this point, you 
should also consult a supervisor/colleague or other professional (e.g., patient’s treating 
physician). 
 
If the patient is not improving, elicit his/her feedback about changes he or she is 
experiencing and his/her perceptions about why these changes have occurred. If a patient 
