---
page: 19
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 18 
Module 4: Case Conceptualization and Treatment Planning 
 
Objectives 
• 
To better understand the role of case conceptualization in cognitive-behavioral 
therapy. 
• 
To develop specific case conceptualization skills, including: 
 
 
a) Assessing patient concerns/difficulties 
 
 
b) Establishing a treatment plan (goal setting) 
 
 
c) Identifying treatment obstacles  
 
What are case conceptualization and treatment planning, and why are they important in 
Brief CBT? 
 
Case conceptualization is a framework used to 1) understand the patient and his/her 
current problems, 2) inform treatment and intervention techniques and 3) serve as a 
foundation to assess patient change/progress. Case conceptualization also aids in 
establishing rapport and a sense of hope for patients. 
 
 
Case conceptualization is vital to effective treatment and represents a defining 
characteristic of expert clinicians. Using these skills, clinicians are better able to define a 
treatment plan using intervention techniques that provide the best opportunities for 
change. This focused and informed approach provides the roadmap for both patients and 
therapists and should include a foundation for assessing change/progress. Case 
conceptualization is particularly important for short-term therapy, as it serves to focus both 
the patient and clinician on the salient issues so as to avoid ancillary problems that often 
serve as distractions to core goals.  
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
 
Conceptualization should begin during the first session and become increasingly 
refined as treatment progresses. 
 
An assessment of current difficulties and the creation of a problem list should occur 
during the first session.  
 
A treatment plan (including treatment goals) should be addressed early in treatment 
(sessions 1, 2). Early conceptualization and treatment planning may require 
modification as additional information becomes available.  
 
Treatment plans and goals should be routinely revisited to ensure that the patient is 
improving and agrees with the flow of the therapeutic work. 
  
