---
page: 54
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

55 
A seven-column thought record is used to challenge dysfunctional thoughts and beliefs. 
Instructions for completing columns 4-7 are described in detail below. 
 
Once a hot thought and its accompanying emotion have been identified and rated, the 
hot thought is questioned to generate evidence for and against it. Building evidence may 
be introduced in the following way: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example: We have identified a thought that is very powerful for you. You rated this 
thought as 90 out of 100 for sadness.  Before spending a lot of time and energy on this 
thought, I want to know whether or not it is true. Often when people are depressed or 
anxious, they take thoughts like this at face value, without first asking whether it is true. 
Accepting thoughts like this as true would certainly lead to the symptoms you’ve been 
struggling with. If I thought, “I am worthless and can’t do anything right,” I wouldn’t 
want to get out of bed in the morning either, and I would probably feel pretty hopeless 
and sad. When we test a thought like this, we are going to generate evidence for and 
against the thought. It is as though the thought were on trial, and you were a lawyer for 
the case. Remember, you have to be able to prove the evidence you are generating. 
So, now let’s see how your thought stands up …. 
Developing Balanced Thinking 
 
These instructions might be useful to help patients develop balanced thinking: 
1. Help the patient question automatic thoughts by asking 
 
What evidence is there that this thought is true? 
 
What evidence is there that this thought is not true? 
 
What would I tell someone I loved if they were in this situation and had these 
thoughts? 
 
If my automatic thought is true, what is the worst that could happen?  
 
If my automatic thought is true, what is the best thing that could happen?  
 
2. Once evidence has been generated, combine it to form a more balanced thought. This 
thought will likely be much longer and more nuanced than the original hot thought. 
Example: Taking all this information (from columns 4-5) into consideration, what is a 
more balanced thought that more accurately reflects the facts? 
You might want to ask the following questions: 
 
Taking the information into account, is there an alternative way of thinking about the 
situation? 
 
Can someone I trust understand this situation in a different way? 
 
3. Rate the believability of the alternative thought between 0-100). If the thought is not more
than 50 believable, more work is needed to identify an alternative thought. Go back to the 
evidence and keep working.  
 
4. Once a believable alternative thought is generated, re-rate the mood associated with 
the hot thought (0-100) after reading the new thought. Reducing a thought/belief to a 
rating of 0 is not a realistic goal. Instead, a reduction of 30-50 often provides relief. Often 
