---
page: 15
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 14 
facilitate more informed questions and better prepare the therapist for additional questions 
and/or rapport development. Ultimately, the therapist has an added task of learning about 
the culture of patients and appreciating life from their perspective.  
 
Showing empathy to a patient helps to validate his or her experiences. Being critical, even 
subtly, of what a patient is sharing in therapy often makes him or her feel judged and 
unwilling to disclose additional information. Use validating responses to show empathy 
towards a patient. Validating responses are simply statements of understanding of your 
patient’s viewpoint. Validating responses usually entail the therapist’s describing what he or 
she heard the patient say.  
 
 
 
Genuineness  
Genuineness is the ability to be authentic and free of dishonesty or hypocrisy. You can be 
professional and express who you are at the same time. Genuineness helps build rapport 
and solidify a therapeutic relationship by allowing the patient to view the therapist as a 
human being. It also allows patients to access the genuineness of the therapist for credible 
critical feedback about progress in their functioning.  
 
Genuineness consists of wide variety of concepts ranging from nonverbal behaviors to overt 
statements. Examples of factors related to genuineness include:   
 
Supporting nonverbal behavior includes behaviors like keeping eye contact, giving 
a patient your full attention, and nodding in agreement or understanding. It’s 
important that these nonverbal behaviors match what is going on in the 
conversation, so as not to seem unnatural or fake.  
 
Role behavior:   CBT therapists encourage patients to be active and empowered 
and subsequently attempt to facilitate this development through their behaviors in 
therapy. Therapists that stress their authority in and between sessions with patients 
