---
page: 55
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

56 
patients will generate new emotions from the alternative thought. However, it is most 
important first to re-rate the old mood before generating new emotions.  
 
The same strategy of generating an alternative thought for a dysfunctional thought is used 
when challenging a core belief. Once the belief is identified, the evidence is weighed and 
a new more balanced belief is generated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary: Completing DTRs 
 
 Identify situation and corresponding thoughts and feelings. 
 Identify cognitive distortions in thoughts (e.g., all or none thinking). 
 Use Socratic questioning to identify hot thought. 
 Elicit and rate emotions associated with hot thought. 
 Rate believability of hot thought. 
 Generate evidence for and against hot thought. 
 Generate alternative thought from evidence. 
 Rate believability of alternative thought. 
 Re-rate emotion of hot thought that is elicited by alternative thought. 
Troubleshooting Thought/Belief Modification 
 
Some patients can see the benefits of doing a thought record immediately, but others 
might need to be motivated to be engaged. It is useful to use positive reinforcement to 
praise the effort of completing a DTR, point out the sections completed correctly, and 
review skills for the sections completed incompletely or inaccurately. If a DTR is assigned for 
homework, it must always be reviewed during the subsequent session. Taking session time to 
review the DTR emphasizes its importance to the patient.  
 
Introducing the DTR as an “experiment” helps alleviate any performance anxiety the 
patient may have about completing it and may generate interest (“Give the DTR a try this 
week, and we’ll see how it works for you. Let me know next session how the experience to 
complete it was. That will help us decide whether or not this is a useful tool for you.”)  
 
Occasionally, a patient will show disinterest in doing the DTR or get tired of it after a while.  
For instances like this, there are other ways you can suggest that the patient can continue 
to attempt the DTR: 
 
 
If a patient complains of never having time to do a DTR when certain situations 
occur, suggest that the patient carry a blank DTR in his/her wallet or purse. 
 
If a patient has done the DTR for awhile and is becoming disinterested, suggest 
doing a “mental” DTR, since he/she is familiar with the process. 
 
Suggest reading old DTRs that have similar situations and automatic thoughts of their 
own. 
 
The patient can verbally dictate a DTR to someone, and have that person write it 
down. 
