---
page: 72
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

73 
Module 13: Relaxation 
 
Objectives 
 
To understand the concept and importance of relaxation in brief CBT 
 
To acquire specific relaxation skills (e.g., muscle relaxation, deep breathing, imagery)  
 
What are relaxation techniques and why are they important?  
 
Relaxation techniques consist of a collection of psychotherapeutic techniques designed to 
reduce tension, stress, worry, and/or anxiety. Relaxation techniques vary in their focus (e.g., 
physical sensations or changes in cognition/thoughts) and can be selected based on 
presenting difficulties, as well as patient preferences. Some patients respond to physical 
procedures (e.g., muscle relaxation and/or deep breathing, while others respond favorably 
to guided imagery.  
 
Relaxation techniques are important for brief therapy for several reasons. First, they focus on 
skills that alleviate stress, anxiety, worry, and tension that are often debilitating and interfere 
with patient functioning. Second, stress, anxiety, worry, and tension are often very 
uncomfortable for patients, and providing help to alleviate their distress can go a long way 
towards increasing positive treatment expectations and rapport. Relaxation techniques are 
easily conveyed as a method of increasing control and often do not include a direct 
discussion of mental health difficulties, which can be important for some patients who are 
concerned about mental health stigma. Finally, relaxation techniques are generally easy to 
teach and learn. For these reasons, it is often advantageous to teach these techniques 
early in treatment to give patients an easy-to- learn, yet highly effective, skill set. 
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
As indicated, relaxation techniques are quite effective early in treatment to reduce tension 
and increase early treatment successes. They generate increased self-efficacy, perceived 
control over stress, and improved coping.  
 
Relaxation techniques are useful for broad application or for a specific patient situation. An 
example of broad applications might include daily relaxation exercises to reduce an overall 
sense of tension or stress not affiliated with any specific situation (e.g., general worry or 
apprehension). Relaxation can also be applied to specific situations such as a needle 
phobia, social anxiety, or stressors at work. 
 
Relaxation procedures can also be appropriate for persons with depressive symptoms to 
increase their perceptions of control. However, it might not be appropriate for depressive 
symptoms occurring outside comorbid anxiety/worry. For example, teaching a severely 
depressed person, who is experiencing fatigue and lack of motivation, to relax would not 
be useful unless the patient has a specific need for relaxation.  
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Regardless of the actual relaxation technique, it is imperative that the physical environment 
be attended to so as to maximize results. Before beginning relaxation techniques, it is 
suggested that you create a safe, quiet, and comfortable environment. You are 
encouraged to work with patients to create such an environment. Patients may be 
