---
page: 68
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

69 
 
Opening Your Mind Through Brainstorming to Solve Problems through SOLVED 
 
 
      SELECT A SPECIFIC PROBLEM: Minimizing Effect 
 
of Symptoms 
OPEN your MIND to 
ALL possible SOLUTIONS 
1. Talk to your doctor. 
2. Change or modify medications. 
3. Engage in healthy life choices, including proper diet and exercise. 
4. Educate yourself by talking to others and by reading about your illness. 
5. Explore alternative treatments. 
SELECT A SPECIFIC PROBLEM: Forgetting to Take Medications 
OPEN your MIND to 
ALL possible SOLUTIONS 
1. Turn several alarm clocks on to remind you. 
2. Put your medication in a place you will notice it at the time you are supposed to take it. 
3. Have a friend or family member remind you. 
4. Buy a medication dispenser to help you remember whether you have taken the medication. 
5. Take it at the same time every day. 
 
 
Other examples of problem-solving worksheets are listed at the end of this module. These 
worksheets expand the common pros and cons lists to help a patient consider multiple 
perspectives and outcomes before making a decision. 
 
Homework Examples: 
 
1.  Create a list of possible solutions to your identified problem (brainstorm). 
2.  Implement your identified solution, assess it effectiveness, and modify as 
necessary. 
 
Supplemental Readings 
Beck, J.S. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford Press; 
Chapter 6. 
Cormier, W.H. & Cormier, L.S. (1991). Interviewing strategies for helpers: Fundamental 
skills and cognitive behavioral interventions, 3rd ed. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole 
Publishing Company; Chapter 13. 
