---
page: 76
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

77 
Step #6:  Ask the patient if he or she notices any changes in breathing and feelings of 
relaxation. Ask for general feedback about the technique. 
Step #7:  Repeat the breathing exercise three or more times until the patient reports skill 
understanding and benefit. 
Step #8:  Ask the patient if he or she can identify situations when deep breathing might be 
appropriate. 
Step #9:  Continue practice outside of session. Work with the patient to set a homework 
assignment that encourages application of deep breathing to situations when the patient 
feels stress. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Imagery 
Imagery is a nonphysiological (cognitive) relaxation technique that can be used to ease 
stress and promote an overall sense of well-being. Imagery focuses on increasing cognitive, 
emotional, and physical control by changing the focus of an individual’s thoughts. We all 
have daydreamed about pleasant things that have distracted us and made us feel better. 
Imagery uses much the same process but encourages positive adaptive “dreaming” that 
distracts and relaxes the individual. Imagery is highly effective for depression and anxiety, as 
well as specific situations that require clarity, focus, distraction, or feelings of mastery. The 
following are examples: 
Other tips for deep breathing: 
1) Inhale through nose and out of mouth. 
2) Ask patient to purse lips (as if blowing on hot soup) while exhaling. 
3) Do not pause between inhales and exhales. 
4) Ask patient to close eyes during the exercise. 
5) Patient may want to use mantra such as “relax” during each exhale. 
6) Pair up deep breathing with imagery once the patient has begun to 
master breathing skills. 
7) Point out that deep breathing is a portable skill that can be used in a 
variety of situations and relatively without notice of others (PMR is less 
portable). 
Topic 
Focused Topic 
Image 
Outcome 
Depression 
Negative 
worth 
Self-
Images of success or 
situations of success; 
of a pleasant past 
experience 
past 
images 
Increased self-confidence; 
reduced negative thoughts; 
distraction from negative 
mood 
Anxiety/Worry
Public Speaking 
Image of speech that goes 
well;  image of something 
funny 
Reduced negative focus, 
distraction, increased positive 
expectations 
Medical 
Anxiety 
Fear of 
Procedure 
needles) 
(e.g., 
Relaxation; peacefulness; 
pain-free environment 
Less tension, reduced anxiety, 
toleration of procedure with 
less distress 
Sports 
Performance 
Focused efforts 
during golf 
game 
Envisioning the desired shot; 
positive words of advice  
Increased focus, 
self-confidence, 
thinking 
increased 
positive 
