---
page: 63
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

64 
meaningful activities related to the prior occupation. In this case, the patient might benefit 
from volunteering at a university, providing consultation (e.g., over email or telephone calls), 
or volunteering for a local school, youth or church organization (e.g., talking about 
engineering).  
 
2) It is also helpful and supportive to look for ways that others can help. Family or other 
social networks that the patient has not yet fully engaged might exist, which might assist the 
patient in moving forward on goals. 
 
3) Pleasant activities are the best first step. Pleasant activities are doubly beneficial to the 
patient, as they increase activity and feelings of pleasure. Activities designed to overcome 
avoidance or increase a sense of accomplishment should be entertained as the first goals 
only if highly important to the patient or apparently salient to the attainment of future goals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Examples of Homework Assignments 
1. What activities did you previously use to enjoy that you would like to start 
participating in again? 
2. List activities that you need to do to better your current situation (enroll in school, get 
your inspection sticker, etc.). 
3. Create a schedule of the new activities you will perform. Which ones did you 
accomplish? Were there any barriers? Why? How did you handle them? 
  
Supplemental Readings: 
Hopko, Lejuez, Ruggiero, et al. Contemporary behavioral activation treatments for 
depression: procedures, principles, and prognosis.  Clin Psychol Rev 2003; 23 (5): 699-717. 
Summary of Steps 
 
Step 1.  Introduce behavioral activation and its potential influence to the patient.
Step 2.  Use patient examples to show relationship between mood and behavior. 
Step 3.  Identify pleasant activities/active-coping behaviors. 
Step 4.  Set an action plan. 
Step 5.  Monitor progress. 
 
