---
page: 90
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

94 
Cognitive Distortions 
1. All-or-Nothing Thinking: Viewing situations on one extreme or another instead of on a 
continuum. 
Ex. “If my child does bad things, it’s because I am a bad parent.” 
 
2. Catastrophizing: Predicting only negative outcomes for the future. 
Ex. “If I fail my final, my life will be over.” 
3. Disqualifying or Discounting the Positive: Telling yourself that the good things that happen 
to you don’t count.  
Ex. “My daughter told her friend that I was the best Dad in the world, but I’m sure 
she was just being nice.” 
4. Emotional Reasoning: Feeling about something overrules facts to the contrary. 
Ex. “Even though Steve is here at work late everyday, I know I work harder than 
anyone else at my job.” 
5. Labeling: Giving someone or something a label without finding out more about it/them. 
Ex. “My daughter would never do anything I disapproved of.” 
6. Magnification/Minimization: Emphasizing the negative or downplaying the positive of a 
situation. 
Ex. “My professor said he made some corrections on my paper, so I know I’ll 
probably fail the class.” 
7. Mental Filter/Tunnel Vision: Placing all your attention on the negatives of a situation or 
seeing only the negatives of a situation.. 
Ex. “My husband says he wished I was better at housekeeping, so I must be a 
lousy wife.” 
EX. “My daughter’s boyfriend got suspended from school. He’s a loser and won’t 
ever amount to anything.” 
8. Mind Reading: Believing you know what others are thinking. 
Ex. “My house was dirty when my friends came over, so I know they think I’m a 
slob.” 
9. Overgeneralization: Making an overall negative conclusion beyond the current situation. 
Ex. “My husband didn’t kiss me when he came home this evening. Maybe he 
doesn’t love me anymore.” 
10. Personalization: Thinking the negative behavior of others has something to do with you. 
Ex. “My daughter has been pretty quiet today. I wonder what I did to upset her.” 
11. “Should” and “Must” Statements: Having a concrete idea of how people should behave. 
Ex. “I should get all A’s to be a good student.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
