---
page: 103
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

107 
Imagery:  Example Scripts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Script # 1: Generic Example 
  
 Once your whole body feels relaxed, travel to your favorite place… it can be any time period 
 or any place. This place is calm and safe… there are no worries here…  Look around this 
 place. What do you see?  Do you hear the sounds around you? What are some of the sounds 
 you hear in this place you are imagining?  How does this special place smell?  Walk around a 
l ittle and take in all the wonderful sights…  Feel the air around you and relax…. The air is fresh, 
an
 
d it’s easy to breathe here. Pay attention to how your body feels.…. Say to yourself, “I am 
t otally relaxed… without worries… all the tension has drained away from my body.”  Take a 
m
 oment to fully experience your favorite place…. Notice the sounds, sights, smells, and how it 
f eels to be in this very special place. Remember that you can visit this place as often as you 
wan
 
t and that it is wonderful. Say to yourself, “I am relaxed here… this place is special and 
m
 akes me feel at peace.” 
  
W
 hen you are done with your visit to this special place, open your eyes; and stay in your 
c omfortable position. Continue to breathe smoothly, in a relaxed and rhythmic fashion. Take 
as
  long as you want to enjoy and relax. You feel at ease knowing your special place is always 
a vailable to you, and you find that you feel relaxed even after you leave. 
Script # 2 – The Beach: 
   Imagine yourself walking down a sandy beach. The sand is white and warm between your 
 toes. You are looking out over the calm, blue water. The waves are gently lapping at the 
 shore. You feel the pleasant warmth of the sun on your skin… it’s a perfectly comfortable 
 temperature outside. Breathe in deeply. There is a gentle breeze, and the sun is shining. Big, 
 cotton-like clouds drift by as you hear sea gulls in the distance.  You taste traces of salt on 
 your lips. You are completely relaxed… there are no worries on this beach. There is nothing to 
 distract you from feeling tranquil. Worries drift away. Notice the sounds, sights, smells, and how
 it feels to be in this very special place.  
 
 Feel the sand under your feet… you decide to stretch out on the warm, fine white sand… 
 breathe deeply… feel the warm air. Your body is completely relaxed, and you have an 
overall feeling of warmth and comfort. You look up as the clouds pass by slowly across the 
 beautiful blue sky. You are feeling rejuvenated and completely at peace. Remember that 
 you can visit this place as often as you want and that it is wonderful. Say to yourself, “I am 
 relaxed here… this place is special and makes me feel peaceful and content.” 
 
 When you are done with your visit, open your eyes and stay in your comfortable position. 
 Continue to breathe smoothly, in a relaxed and rhythmic fashion; take as long as you want to 
 enjoy and relax. You feel at ease knowing your special place is always available to you, and 
 you find that you feel relaxed even after you leave. 
 
