---
page: 45
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

46 
Although you may not discuss beliefs directly with the patient, as part of the case 
conceptualization, he/she should constantly be forming hypotheses about what beliefs 
may be driving the thoughts (see Module 4: Case Conceptualization and Treatment 
Planning).  
 
In identifying thoughts and beliefs, ask yourself several questions. 
  
 
Is the thought/belief secondary to another thought/belief? 
 
How much does the patient believe it? 
 
Does it affect the patient’s life negatively? 
 
Is the patient prepared to work on it now, or should he/she tackle the belief at a 
later date? 
 
After an automatic thought or belief is identified, it is challenged using the skills in Module 9.  
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Explaining Automatic Thoughts to Your Patient 
 
It is important for the patient to understand the rationale for identifying automatic thoughts 
before acquiring the skill of addressing his/her own thoughts. Using the situationthought 
feeling triangle introduced in Module 5 (Orienting the Patient to Brief CBT) can be helpful in 
explaining automatic thoughts. Completing the triangle with the patient’s recent or current 
automatic thoughts can facilitate his/her understanding.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therapist:  
“So, Pamela, how have you been feeling this week?” 
Pamela:  
“Just really sad…as usual. It seems like I’m always feeling that way.” 
Therapist:  
“Did anything in particular trigger this sad feeling this weekend?” 
Pamela:  
“Yes, I had to go to my cousin’s wedding, and it was really difficult because I 
started thinking about how I will never get married.” 
Therapist:  
“Pamela, that’s what we call an automatic thought. It’s something that just 
pops into our heads over and over again without our really thinking about it or 
examining the truth of the thought. It affects the way we feel and act in a 
negative way. Maybe we should look at some of your automatic thoughts a 
little closer.” 
Using the patient's example, describe the association between thoughts and feelings to 
build awareness of the connection. This is a good time for the patient to write down the 
thought and begin using the cognitive-behavioral model.  
Therapist:  
“ So, let’s write down this automatic thought that you are having. I will never 
get married. Your going to your cousin’s wedding was the situation that 
triggered the thought, ‘I will never get married’.  
Pamela: 
 “Yes, that’s true.” 
Therapist:  
“When you were at the wedding and that thought came to you, how did you 
feel?” 
Pamela:  
“I felt really sad and hopeless.” 
Therapist:  
So, can you see how our thoughts can affect our mood and change the way 
we are feeling?” 
 
Pamela:  
“Yeah, I guess if I hadn’t had that thought, I wouldn’t have felt so bad.” 
