---
page: 29
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

30 
 
Avoidance and escape are particular learned behavioral patterns targeted in CBT. For 
example, not going to class because someone fears large crowds is an avoidance 
behavior. If someone leaves class because of anxiety over a large crowd, it is an escape 
behavior. 
 
Initial Session 
 
To prepare for the initial session, you are encouraged to thoroughly review all intake 
information. You need the intake information to form an initial conceptualization and 
formulation of a therapeutic plan. Using the patient’s presenting problems, symptoms, 
current level of functioning, and history helps in developing the therapeutic plan. From the 
intake information, it is also imperative that you assess the patient’s suicidality. This can be 
done by asking about the patient’s suicidal ideation, intent, or plan and determining his or 
her level of hopelessness, as well as the reasons for hopelessness. If the patient’s suicidality 
seems high, then crisis intervention is above all other therapeutic considerations. In the case 
of an acutely suicidal patient, you are encouraged to seek supervision or consultation and 
follow approved clinic procedures for managing a suicidal patient (e.g., contact on-call 
psychiatrist for evaluation).  
 
Patient Expectations for Treatment   
You should inquire about what the patient knows about how therapy is conducted. 
Orienting your patient to therapy includes describing the cognitive-behavioral model and 
answering any questions he/she might have about the progression of therapy. Using the 
patient’s examples to help explain the cognitive-behavioral model will assist him/her in 
being able to see how the model can work and how it has worked for other patients with 
problems similar to his or hers. Often patients think therapy is a place where they will come 
and be lectured and told what to do or a place to vent without a focus on behavior 
change. It is essential in Brief CBT that the patient understands that therapy is a partnership 
between the therapist and the patient, in which they work together so that the patient can 
better understand feelings and solve problems.  
 
Negotiating the amount of time the patient will need to be in therapy is also important. For 
Brief CBT, patients typically attend weekly individual sessions for 4-8 weeks. However, the 
amount of time in therapy and the number of days a week can be reassessed periodically 
and adjusted to meet the needs of the patient.  
 
Discussing Symptoms and Diagnostic Issues with the Patient 
Most patients want to know how they have been diagnosed. Explain the disorder in terms of 
cognitive and behavioral symptoms, to clarify how CBT will directly address their problems. 
Giving patients descriptions of common symptoms of their disorder can also be helpful.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example: There are cognitive and behavioral aspects of feeling depressed. 
Cognitive characteristics of depression include having negative thoughts 
about yourself, such as “I am no good,” or “Things are not going to get 
better.” Behavioral characteristics are ways your body tells you you’re 
depressed, such as changes in your appetite or sleep patterns. 
