---
page: 7
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 6 
Module 1: Introduction to Brief Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) 
 
Objectives 
 
To understand CBT and the process of Brief CBT 
 
To identify key treatment considerations and problems most suitable for Brief CBT 
 
To learn how to assess the patient’s  suitability for Brief CBT 
 
What is Brief CBT, and why does it require specific treatment considerations? 
 
CBT combines cognitive and behavioral therapies and has strong empirical support for 
treating mood and anxiety disorders (Chambless & Ollendick, 2001; DeRubeis & Crits-
Christoph, 1998). The basic premise of CBT is that emotions are difficult to change directly, 
so CBT targets emotions by changing thoughts and behaviors that are contributing to the 
distressing emotions.  
 
 
CBT builds a set of skills that enables an individual to be aware of thoughts and emotions; 
identify how situations, thoughts, and behaviors influence emotions; and improve feelings 
by changing dysfunctional thoughts and behaviors. The process of CBT skill acquisition is 
collaborative. Skill acquisition and homework assignments are what set CBT apart from “talk 
therapies.” You should use session time to teach skills to address the presenting problem and 
not simply to discuss the issue with the patient or offer advice.  
 
Brief CBT is the compression of CBT material and the reduction of the average 12-20 sessions 
into four to eight sessions. In Brief CBT the concentration is on specific treatments for a 
limited number of the patient’s problems. Specificity of the treatment is required because of 
the limited number of sessions and because the patient is required to be diligent in using 
extra reading materials and homework to assist in his or her therapeutic growth. 
 
Brief CBT can range in duration from patient to patient and provider to provider.  Although 
variability exists, the following table shows an example session-by-session outline. You are 
encouraged to think flexibly in determining length of treatment. Time-limited therapy may 
offer additional incentive for patients and therapists to work efficiently and effectively. 
However, the exact length of treatment will likely be determined by a host of factors 
involving the therapist, patient, and treatment setting. As indicated in the following table, 
you are not expected to rigidly adhere to a "set schedule" of progress or topics but rather 
should be flexible and adaptive in approaching all brief CBT applications. For example, it is 
often helpful to work within a "session-limited framework" where the patient receives four to 
six sessions of "active" treatment, followed by one or more follow-up sessions that occur at 
increasing intervals after the active-treatment phase (e.g., 2 weeks post treatment with an 
additional booster 4 weeks after that). 
