---
page: 14
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 13 
Module 3: Nonspecific Factors in Brief CBT 
 
Objectives 
 
To better understand the need for a strong therapeutic relationship in Brief CBT 
 
To understand the factors associated with a strong therapeutic relationship 
 
To learn strategies for developing rapport and maximizing non-specific factors 
 
What are Nonspecific Factors, and why are they important to CBT? 
 
CBT is structured and goal-directed. The context is supportive, and the techniques are 
paired with a collaborative therapeutic stance. Nonspecific factors refer to the relationship 
components of therapy (e.g., rapport, installation of hope, trust, collaboration) and can be 
compared with specific factors that refer to the technical aspects of psychotherapy (e.g., 
the actual techniques such as guided imagery, thought challenging, etc.) Nonspecific 
factors are common within all psychotherapies and serve as the foundation for patient 
improvement. Specific factors refer to intervention techniques unique to the type of therapy 
being provided (e.g., CBT, psychodynamic, interpersonal). Studies show that nonspecific 
factors are responsible for a large percentage of the change associated with 
psychotherapy treatments.  
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications) 
 
Nonspecific factors are critical during the early stages, but important at all phases, of 
treatment. Strong nonspecific factors aid in engaging and retaining patients in 
psychotherapy and also strengthen the technical components of treatment. Patients who 
perceive the therapeutic relationship to be collaborative, safe, and trusting are in a better 
position to obtain benefit from the treatment, will likely be less resistant and will be more 
open to exploration and change. As treatment progresses, the therapeutic relationship  
should become stronger, allowing the therapist and patient to gradually move into more 
complex and meaningful therapeutic issues.  
 
How? (Instructions/Handouts) 
 
Borrowing from person-centered therapy, this module focuses on three factors important to 
the development of a strong therapeutic relationship. These factors are empathy, 
genuineness, and positive regard. These concepts are defined and discussed but represent 
general characteristics that all therapists should seek to attain in working with patients. 
Following a discussion of these principles, the concept of active listening is introduced as a 
technique to better attain a solid therapeutic relationship.  
 
Empathy (Validating the Patient's Experience) 
Empathy is the ability to understand experiences from another person’s point of view. 
Empathy is an important part of building rapport and facilitates feelings of trust and mutual 
respect between the patient and therapist. It is necessary for the therapist to consider the 
concept of “multicultural empathy,” which relates to understanding persons from other life 
backgrounds (ethnicity, socioeconomic status, age cohort, gender, etc.). It is impossible for 
a therapist to be knowledgeable about every patient's unique background. Empathy, 
which at its core consists of asking questions in a respectfully curious manner and expressing 
emotional understanding of the answers received, is a solid first step towards understanding 
patients' unique life background. Additional reading about cultural differences may 
