---
page: 46
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

47 
 
 
Eliciting Automatic Thoughts 
 
It is important for therapists to teach patients how to identify automatic thoughts during and 
outside of session.  
 
Automatic Thoughts in Session 
Be aware of patient’s hot thoughts during sessions. Hot thoughts are automatic thoughts 
that occur in combination with a change in emotion or mood. Hot thoughts are particularly 
poignant or strong thoughts that are often associated with dysfunctional core beliefs, and 
should be targeted in therapy. Hot thoughts and the accompanying situation and emotion 
are tracked on the first three columns of the thought record (see p. 47).  
 
To identify which automatic thoughts are “hot”, the therapist listens for verbal cues, such as 
the language used in the thought (see Cognitive Distortion worksheet, p. 49), and watches 
nonverbal cues, such as increased volume of speech or fidgeting. Changes in facial 
expression, shifts in position, or hand movements can be helpful in determining whether a 
patient is experiencing an automatic hot thought. Listening to tone, pitch, volume, and the 
pace of a patient’s speech is also beneficial. When you notice these actions, this is an 
opportune time to bring it to the patient’s attention and assist him/her in identifying an 
automatic thought associated with the shift in emotions. In these instances, you are simply 
an observer of the behavior and make a note of your observation to the patient (“You are 
speaking more loudly; what is going through your mind right now?”). The patient then 
provides an explanation of the behavior. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patient: 
 “My boss reprimanded me again yesterday” (sighs heavily.) 
Therapist: 
 “Tell me more.” 
Patient:  
“Well, we were at a meeting; and I had just made my presentation, and he 
said he had expected a better product for the client. (voice gets softer, 
begins wringing hands). 
Therapist:  
“Your voice changed a little when you said that; tell me what is going 
through your mind right now?” 
Patient:  
“I just feel like a failure at everything. My work has always been the one thing 
I was good at, and now I am failing at that, too.” 
