---
page: 30
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

31 
Feedback  
The collaborative piece of CBT involves asking a patient for feedback on the session (e.g., 
“What did you think about our session today? Did we leave out anything you think is 
important to discuss?”) and on how he/she feels about the cognitive-behavioral model 
(“Do you feel you have at least a basic understanding of the model, or should we be sure 
to review it in detail again next week?”) at the end of the first and subsequent sessions.  
 
Encouraging the patient to offer feedback strengthens the rapport and trust within the 
therapeutic relationship and indicates to the patient that they are an active member of the 
therapeutic process. It shows that the therapist cares about what the patient thinks and 
feels and values his/her input. This is also a time to resolve misunderstandings about the 
cognitive model or things that occurred in the session (“Was there anything that bothered 
you about the session, or anything that you’d like to change?”). Getting feedback from the 
patient shows how important it is to work as a team and also helps you work on sharpening 
your abilities in therapy. It also allows you to attend to and repair any real or perceived 
therapeutic fissures or needed treatment modifications in a timely way. 
 
 
 
Important Introdu ctory Elements 
 Introduce Processes of Psychothe rapy 
o 
Transparent 
 
o 
Collaborative 
 
o 
Time-Limited 
 
 Introduce Cognitive-Behavioral M odel 
o 
Research Basis 
 
o 
Association between beh aviors, thoughts, feelings, and 
situations 
 
o 
Use of examples from patient’s past week to clarify associations 
 
 Educate the patient about his/her disorder 
 
o 
Describe patient’s problems in cognitive and behavioral terms 
 
 Instill hope and empowerment  
o 
Request for feedback 
 
o 
Creation of a warm, collaborative therapeutic environment 
Homework Assignment Examples 
1. Keep a running list of questions you may have about the therapeutic process, and 
bring it with you to the next session. 
2. Use the cognitive-behavioral model diagram for at least three situations you 
experience this week. 
1. Create a short list of the things you liked about the previous session and a short list of 
the things you wish we could have changed about the previous session and/or 
concerns you might have. 
 
Supplemental Readings 
Greenberg, D. & Padesky, C.A. (1995). Mind over mood: Change the way you feel 
by changing the way you think. New York: Guilford Press; Chapters. 1, 2, & 4.  
 
