---
page: 34
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example Homework Assignments 
1. Make a short list of broad goals.  What areas of your life do you wish to improve (e.g. 
work, family, social, recreational, financial, health, etc.)?  Think about which goal 
would be most important. 
2. List three issues, in order of importance, that you want to discuss in the next session. 
3. Weigh the pros and cons of each goal that we have agreed upon in treatment. 
 
Supplemental Readings 
Beck, J.A. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford Press, 
Chapter 6. 
Cormier, W.H. & Cormier, L.S. (1991). Interviewing strategies for helpers: Fundamental 
skills and cognitive behavioral interventions, 3rd ed. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole 
Publishing Company; Chapter 10. 
 
 
Tips for Goal Setting (Continued) 
 
 
Define a Level of Change. 
• 
This determines how much a patient should do a particular behavior.  
• 
To increase the patient’s chance of success, set achievable goals. In other 
words, it is usually not reasonable to try to do something every day, and 
setting a goal like this will result in failure if the patient misses just 1 day. 
Alternatively, discuss the goal with the patient; and start small. If the patient 
succeeds, he/she is more likely to remain actively engaged. 
 
Example: How often do you think it is reasonable to do something 
pleasant? Once a week? 
 
 
Regularly Evaluate Symptoms. 
• 
Track how effective the goals are in decreasing mental health symptoms and 
increasing functioning and quality of life.  
• 
For example, assess the following areas during the intake process, during the 
actual intervention strategy, and a month to a year after termination of 
therapy: 
 
Patient’s level of satisfaction with your assistance and the results of 
therapy 
 
Amount of growth the patient experienced from the beginning of 
therapy to the end 
 
Benefits obtained by the change made by the patient and which 
treatment was effective in helping to accomplish the goal 
• 
Self-report tools, such as the Beck Depression Inventory or mood-tracking 
charts, and clinician-administered assessments, such as the Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale, may be used as objective measures of change over 
the course of treatment. 
