---
page: 21
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

 20 
C) Assessing cognitions.  Within the CBT model, it is often helpful to examine the patient's 
thoughts especially as they are perceived by the patient. A commonly used, structured wa
to examine these factors is to assess (ask questions related to) how the patient perceives 
him-/herself, others, and the future. For example, a patient might describe him- or herself as 
incapable, not useful, or a burden. He or she may generally perceive others to be critical or 
hard to please. And his/her  view of the future might be largely pessimistic and contain 
beliefs that the future will include only more losses and disappointments (see also Thought 
Records in Modules 9 and 10). 
 
D)  Assessing behaviors and precipitating situations. Precipitating situations are events, 
behaviors, thoughts, or emotions that activate, trigger, or compound patient difficulties. 
 
The Antecedents, Behavior, Consequences (ABC) Model is a formalized model for 
examining behavior (symptoms) in a larger context. It postulates that behaviors are largely 
determined by antecedents (events that precede behavior/thoughts/mood) and 
consequences (events that follow the behavior/thoughts/mood).  
 
The ABC model (see worksheet) is used in a functional assessment. It follows the premise 
that behavior (B) is shaped by antecedents (A) and consequences (C). The antecedent 
occurs before a behavior and may be a trigger for a particular reaction in the patient.  
Behavior is any activity (even a thought or feeling) that the patient exhibits in response to 
an antecedent. Consequences are events that occur after the behavior and direct the 
patient to either continue or discontinue the behavior. Two kinds of consequences are 
examined in a functional assessment: short-term and long-term consequences.  
 
Antecedents:  Antecedents, or events that occur before a behavior, typically elicit 
emotional and physiological responses. Antecedents may be affective (an emotion), 
somatic (a physiological response), behavioral (an act), or cognitive (a thought). They are 
also subject to contextual (situational) and relational (interpersonal) factors. For example, a 
patient who reports depression (behavior) may feel bad when he or she is alone at home 
late at night (contextual antecedent) or better when he or she is around family (relational 
antecedent). Alternatively, he or she may feel depressed by thinking, “I will always be 
alone” (cognitive antecedent). It’s important to remember that antecedents can both 
increase and decrease a particular behavior. 
 
To help your patient identify antecedents, teach him or her to pinpoint conditions that 
affect his or her behavior. 
y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“What were you feeling right before you did that?”  (Affective) 
“What happens to you physically before this happens? Do you feel sick?”  (Somatic) 
“How do you normally act right before this happens?” (Behavioral) 
“What thoughts go through your mind before this happens?” (Cognitive) 
“Where and when does this usually happen?” (Contextual) 
“Do you do this with everyone, or just when you are around certain people?” (Relational) 
Behaviors:  A behavior is anything the patient does, feels, or thinks immediately following the 
antecedent. Each behavior that your patient displays could potentially include an affective 
component (feelings or moods), a somatic component (bodily sensations such as rapid 
