---
page: 61
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

62 
The figure below visually describes the connection between mood and behavior and can 
be an effective aid in communicating with patients. To maximize the utility of the figure, you 
are encouraged to use the patient's own examples. For example, you and the patient can 
work together to complete a daily activity log (see handout). From this activity log, you 
might highlight activities that appeared to raise or lower the patient's mood. 
 
 
 
If depressed persons increase their activities on a daily basis, it improves mood and 
decreases symptoms of depression. 
 
 
 
Step #2:  Identifying Behaviors - Discussing Activities. 
Identification of potential activities begins by exploring with the patient activities that would 
be most meaningful. Have a general discussion of types of things he/she would like to do 
but have not been able to do and activities he/she already does but would like to do more 
often within the context of values or goals that are important to him/her. You might want to 
ask if there is something that he or she needs to do that he/she has been unable to do or 
has been avoiding. Some patients may want to accomplish something rather than focus on 
doing something pleasant.  
 
Possible questions might include: 
• 
"Can you think of any activities or hobbies that you used to enjoy doing but have 
now stopped doing?" 
• 
"Can you think of any activities or hobbies that you would like to do but have never 
done? 
• 
"Are there things in your life that you would like to change?  If so, what would you like 
to do about these issues that you have previously not done?" 
 
