---
page: 44
source: therapists_guide_to_brief_cbtmanual.pdf
---

45 
solidified over time as a result of one’s perceptions of experiences. Because individuals with 
psychological disorders tend to store information consistent with negative beliefs but ignore 
evidence that contradicts them, core beliefs tend to be rigid and pervasive. Although 
automatic thoughts are often tied to a specific situational trigger, intermediate and core 
beliefs are more global and cut across domains. Beck suggests that individuals tend to have 
core beliefs that involve either interpersonal (“I’m unlovable”) or achievement issues (“I’m 
incompetent”). 
 
When? (Indications/Contraindications)  
 
Identifying maladaptive automatic thoughts is the first step in the cognitive component of 
therapy. The focus of intervention in Brief CBT is the dysfunctional automatic thought. 
Patients must master identifying and challenging thoughts to be able to grasp the concept 
and techniques of challenging beliefs. Because of the interrelated nature of thoughts and 
beliefs, an intervention targeting automatic thoughts may also change underlying beliefs 
(depicted below). Therefore, Brief CBT can result in belief modification, even if the target of 
treatment was automatic thoughts. 
 
 
Because patients progress through treatment at different rates, you may be able to identify 
and challenge some beliefs late in brief therapy (sessions 5-8) for some patients. For other 
patients, work will be limited to automatic thoughts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Because skill building to alleviate symptoms and prevent relapse is a 
central focus of CBT, mastery of skills is paramount. Focus on building a 
skill set with the patient that he or she can generalize to different 
situations, thoughts, or beliefs. It is less important to identify and modify 
deep-seated childhood beliefs. For most patients in Brief CBT, this will not 
be necessary for symptom reduction. However, some patients may 
benefit from this work. 
